The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Polyglot of Foreign Proverbs, by Henry Bohn

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.



Title: A Polyglot of Foreign Proverbs
       Comprising French, German, Dutch, Spanish, Portuguese and
       Danish, with English Translations and a General Index

Author: Henry Bohn

Release Date: January 31, 2016 [EBook #51090]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A POLYGLOT OF FOREIGN PROVERBS ***




Produced by Giovanni Fini,  Chris Curnow, Lindy Walsh and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net







                         TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES:

—Obvious print and punctuation errors were corrected.

—Whereas adequate characters are not available, superscript has been
 rendered as a^b and a^{bc}.




                                   A
                               POLYGLOT
                                  OF
                           FOREIGN PROVERBS

                              COMPRISING

                    FRENCH, ITALIAN, GERMAN, DUTCH,
                   SPANISH, PORTUGUESE, AND DANISH,
                       WITH ENGLISH TRANSLATIONS

                                 AND A
                            GENERAL INDEX.

                                  BY
                            HENRY G. BOHN.

                                LONDON:
              HENRY G. BOHN, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.
                              MDCCCLVII.




PREFACE.


WHILE engaged in editing my Handbook of English Proverbs, it occurred
to me that a Collection of Foreign Proverbs, arranged in monographs,
and brought as far as possible into juxta-position by a General Index,
would be an interesting volume, as well to the ordinary reader as to
the linguist. And it happened that more than one public writer, in
reviewing my Handbook, suggested nearly the same idea, which determined
me to realise it as speedily as other engagements would permit.

After a lapse of more than two years, and much patient labour, during
intervals of business or hours snatched from repose, I am enabled to
present my gleanings to the public, and hope they will not be found
deficient of grain.

It will be seen that many of the proverbs are quite new to the English
reader, and that others, hitherto supposed to be essentially, if not
exclusively, English, are common to several other languages.

A task so various and complicated could not well be executed without
aid, nor do I pretend to be master of all the languages included.
Accordingly, I sought the assistance of competent scholars, and have
great pleasure in here proclaiming my acknowledgments to them. After
the groundwork of the volume had been laid by selections from a great
variety of sources, an operation in which Mr. W. K. Kelly was my
principal collaborateur, I was aided in correcting the Italian by
Signor Pistrucci, the Spanish by Señor Yrazoqui and the Chevalier
Francisque Michel, the Portuguese by Senhôr Guerra, the Danish by Miss
Rowan, and the Dutch by Mr. John van Baalen, of Rotterdam. It seemed
to me advisable, to secure all possible accuracy, that each foreign
language should be read over by a native of the country.

For the English translations (excepting those from the Danish) I am
myself mainly responsible, as, where those already existing did not
satisfy me, I generally substituted others. I have, however, been very
forbearing towards some pleasant bits of doggerel and alliteration
found in early volumes, and have occasionally indulged in similar
playfulness of my own. One so deeply immersed in Proverb-lore may,
perhaps, be forgiven for having imbibed such a tendency.

In the Index, a single line is often made to represent a whole group,
although the several translations may not be exactly the same. That
adopted as the key, being the last thought, ought to be the best.
The running lines at the top indicate the pages of each of the
several languages, so that by a comparison of them with the figures
of reference below, it will be easy to see what monograph a proverb
belongs to, without actually turning to the page.

  HENRY G. BOHN.

  August 30, 1857.




           CONTENTS.


                          PAGE

  FRENCH PROVERBS        1- 64
  ITALIAN               65-132
  GERMAN               133-192
  SPANISH              193-262
  PORTUGUESE           263-295
  DUTCH                296-345
  DANISH               346-403
  ENGLISH INDEX        405-579




FRENCH PROVERBS.


A.

A barbe de fol apprend-on à raire. _On a fool’s beard the barber learns
to shave._

A beau demandeur, beau refuseur. _Handsomely asked, handsomely refused._

A beau jeu beau retour. _One good turn deserves another._

A beau mentir qui vient de loin. _He may lie boldly who comes from
afar._

A bon appétit il ne faut point de sauce. _Hunger is the best sauce._

A bon chat bon rat. _To a good cat a good rat._

A bon cheval point d’éperon. _Spur not a willing horse._

A bon chien il ne vient jamais un bon os. _A good dog never gets a good
bone._

Abondance de biens ne nuit pas. _Store is no sore._

A bon entendeur demi-mot. _A word to the wise._

A bon pêcheur échappe anguille. _An eel escapes from a good fisherman._

A bon vin point d’enseigne. _Good wine needs no sign._

A brebis tondue Dieu mesure le vent. _God tempers the wind to the shorn
lamb._

Absent le chat, les souris dansent. _When the cat’s away the mice will
play._

Absent n’est point sans coulpe ni présent sans excuse. _Absent, none
without blame; present, none without excuse._

A carême-prenant chacun a besoin de sa poële. _At shrove-tide every one
has need of his frying-pan._

A celui qui a son pâté au four on peut donner de son gâteau. _To one
who has a pie in the oven you may give a bit of your cake._

A chacun son fardeau pèse. _Every one feels his own burden heavy._

A chair de loup sauce de chien. _For wolf’s flesh dog sauce._

A chaque fou plaît sa marotte. _Every fool likes his bauble._

A chaque jour suffit sa peine. _Sufficient for the day is the evil
thereof._

A chaque saint son cierge. _To every saint his candle._

A chemin battu ne croît point d’herbe. _No grass grows on a beaten
road._

Acheter chat en poche. _To buy a cat in a poke._

A cheval donné, il ne faut point regarder à la bouche. _Look not a gift
horse in the mouth._

A chose faite conseil pris. _When a thing is done advice comes too
late._

A confesseurs, médecins, avocats, la vérité ne cèle de ton cas. _From
confessors, doctors, and lawyers, do not conceal the truth of your
case._

Adieu paniers, vendanges sont faites. _Farewell baskets, the vintage is
ended._

A dur âne dur aiguillon. _For a stubborn ass a hard goad._

A femme avare galant escroc. _A covetous woman deserves a swindling
gallant._

A force de mal aller tout ira bien. _By dint of going wrong all will
come right._

A fripon fripon et demi. _To a rogue a rogue and a half._

A goupil endormi rien ne lui chet en gueule. _Nothing falls into the
mouth of a sleeping fox._

A homme hardi fortune tend la main. _To a bold man fortune holds out
her hand._

Aide-toi, le ciel t’aidera. _Help thyself and heaven will help thee._

Aime-moi un peu, mais continue. _Love me a little, but love me long._

Aimer et savoir n’ont même manière. _To love and to be wise are two
different things._

Ainsi dit le renard des mûres, quand il n’en peut avoir: elles ne sont
point bonnes. _The fox says of the mulberries when he cannot get at
them: they are not good at all._

Aisé à dire est difficile à faire. _Easy to say is hard to do._

A la chandelle la chèvre semble demoiselle. _By candle-light a goat
looks like a lady._

A la fin saura-t-on qui a mangé le lard. _In the end it will be known
who ate the bacon._

A la guerre comme à la guerre. _At the wars as they do at the wars._

A l’amour et au feu on s’habitue. _One grows used to love and to fire._

A la presse vont les fous. _Fools go in throngs._

A la queue gît le venin. _In the tail lies the venom._

A l’aventure on met les ”oe]ufs couver. _Eggs are put to hatch on
chance._

A laver la tête d’un âne on ne perd que le temps et la lessive. _To
wash an ass’s head is but loss of time and soap._ (_To reprove a fool
is but lost labour._)

A l’impossible nul n’est tenu. _No one is bound to do impossibilities._

Aller aux mûres sans crochet. _To go mulberry-gathering without a
crook._

Aller en vendanges sans panier. _To go to the vintage without baskets._

A l’”oe]il malade la lumière nuit. _Light is bad for sore eyes._

A l’”oe]uvre on connaît l’ouvrier. _The workman is known by his work._

A l’ongle on connaît le lion. _You may know the lion by his claw._

A longue corde tire qui d’autrui mort désire. _He pulls at a long rope
who desires another’s death._

A mal enfourner on fait les pains cornus. _Loaves put awry into the
oven come out crooked._

A mal pasteur le loup chie laine. _An easy shepherd makes the wolf void
wool._

A marmite qui bout mouche ne s’attaque. _Flies will not light on a
boiling pot._

A mauvais chien l’on ne peut montrer le loup. _There’s no showing the
wolf to a bad dog._

A méchant chien court lien. _A vicious dog must be tied short._

A merle soûl cerises sont amères. _Cherries are bitter to the glutted
blackbird._

Ami de table est variable. _A table friend is changeable._

A morceau restif éperon de vin. _A restive morsel needs a spur of
wine._

Amour de grands, ombre de buisson qui passe bientôt. _The friendship of
great men is like the shadow of a bush, soon gone._

Amour et seigneurie ne veulent point de compagnie. _Love and lordship
like no fellowship._

Amour fait moult, argent fait tout. _Love does much, money everything._

Amour soumet tout hormis c”oe]ur de félon. _Love subdues everything
except the recreant’s heart._

Amour, toux, fumée, et argent, ne se peuvent cacher longuement. _Love,
a cough, smoke, and money, cannot long be hid._

Amour, toux, et fumée, en secret ne font demeurée. _Love, a cough, and
smoke will not remain secret._

Ane piqué convient qu’il trotte. _A goaded ass must trot._

A nouveaux seigneurs nouvelles lois. _New lords, new laws._

A nul ne peut être ami qui de soi-même est ennemi. _He cannot be a
friend to any one who is his own enemy._

A paroles lourdes oreilles sourdes. _To rude words deaf ears._

A père avare enfant prodigue. _A miserly father makes a prodigal son._

A petite achoison le loup prend le mouton. _Upon a slight pretext the
wolf takes the sheep._

A petite fontaine boit-on à son aise. _At a little fountain one drinks
at one’s ease._

A petit mercier, petit panier. _A little pack serves a little pedlar._

Après bon vin bon cheval. _Good wine makes the horse go._

Après dommage chacun est sage. _After mischance every one is wise._

Après la fête on gratte la tête. _After a feast a man scratches his
head._

Après la pluie le beau temps. _After rain fine weather._

Après la mort le médecin. _After death the doctor._

Après le fait ne vaut souhait. _After the act wishing is in vain._

Après moi le déluge. _After me the deluge._

Après perdre perd-on bien. _After one loss come many._

Après raire n’y a plus que tondre. _After shaving there’s nothing to
shear._

A quelque chose malheur est bon. _Ill-luck is good for something._

A qui il meschet on lui meffaict. _Where misfortune befals injuries
follow._

A qui vendez-vous vos coquilles? A ceux qui viennent de Saint Michel.
_To whom do you offer your shells for sale? To people who come from
Saint Michel (where shells abound)._

A qui veut rien n’est impossible. _Nothing is impossible to a willing
mind._

A raconter ses maux souvent on les soulage. _By telling our woes we
often assuage them._

Argent ard gent. _Money burns many._

Argent comptant porte médecine. _Ready money works great cures._

Argent emprunté porte tristesse. _Money borrowed is soon sorrowed._

Argent est rond, il faut qu’il roule. _Money is round, it must roll._

Argent reçu, le bras rompu. _The money paid, the workman’s arm is
broken._

A Rome comme à Rome. _At Rome do as Rome does._

A rude âne rude ânier. _For a stubborn ass a stubborn driver._

Assez a qui se contente. _He has enough who is content._

Assez demande qui bien sert. _Who serves well asks enough._

Assez dort qui rien ne fait. _He slumbers enough who does nothing._

Assez écorche qui le pied tient. _He flays enough who holds the foot._

Assez gagne qui malheur perd. _He gains enough who loses sorrow._

Assez n’y a si trop n’y a. _There’s not enough if there’s not too much._

Assez parents, assez tourments. _Much kindred, much trouble._

Assez sait qui sait vivre et se taire. _He knows enough who knows how
to live and keep his own counsel._

Assez tôt se fait ce qui bien se fait. _That is done soon enough which
is well done._

Assez tôt si assez bien. _Soon enough if well enough._

A tard crie l’oiseau quand il est pris. _Too late the bird cries out
when it is caught._

A toile ourdie Dieu envoie le fil. _For a web begun God sends thread._

A tout il y a commencement. _Everything must have a beginning._

A tout oiseau son nid est beau. _To every bird its nest seems fair._

A tout seigneur tout honneur. _To every lord every honour._

A trop acheter n’y a que revendre. _For overbuying there’s no help but
selling again._

Au battre faut l’amour. _By beating love decays._

Au besoin l’on connaît l’ami. _A friend is known in time of need._

Au dernier les os. _For the last-comer the bones._

Au diable tant de maîtres, dit le crapaud à la herse. _To the devil
with so many masters, said the toad to the harrow._

Aujourd’hui marié, demain marri. _Married to-day, marred to-morrow._

Au long aller petit fardeau pèse. _Light burdens borne far become
heavy._

Au nouveau tout est beau. _What is new is always fine._

Au pays des aveugles les borgnes sont rois. _The one-eyed are kings in
the land of the blind._

Au petit pourceau Dieu donne bonne racine. _God puts a good root in the
little pig’s way._

A un pauvre homme sa vache meurt et au riche son enfant. _Death takes
the poor man’s cow and the rich man’s child._

Au plus débile la chandelle à la main. _The weakest must hold the
candle._

Au premier coup ne chet pas l’arbre. _The tree does not fall at the
first stroke._

Au prêter ange, au rendre diable. _In borrowing an angel, in repaying a
devil._

Au prêter cousin germain, au rendre fils de putain. _At borrowing
cousin german, at repaying son of a whore._

Aussi tôt meurt veau que vache. _As soon dies the calf as the cow._

Autant chemine un homme en un jour qu’un limaçon en cent ans. _A man
travels as far in a day as a snail in a hundred years._

Autant dépend chiche que large, et à la fin plus davantage. _The
niggard spends as much as he who is liberal, and in the end more._

Autant de têtes, autant d’avis. _So many men, so many minds._

Autant de trous, autant de chevilles. _A peg for every hole._

Autant pèche celui qui tient le sac que celui qui met dedans. _He sins
as much who holds the bag as he who puts into it._

Autant vaut bien battre que mal battre. _You may as well give a good
beating as a bad one._

Autant vaut bien battu que mal battu. _One may as well be well beaten
as badly beaten._

Autant vaut être mordu d’un chien que d’une chienne. _It is all one
whether you are bit by a dog or a bitch._

Autant vaut l’homme comme il s’estime. _A man is valued according to
his own estimate of himself._

Autre temps, autres m”oe]urs. _Other times, other manners._

Aux grands maux les grands remèdes. _Desperate ills require desperate
remedies._

A vaillant homme courte épée. _A short sword for a brave man._

Avec du temps et de la paille les nèfles mûrissent. _With time and
straw medlars ripen._

Avec un Si on mettrait Paris dans une bouteille. _With the help of an
If you might put Paris into a bottle._

A vieille mule frein doré. _A gilt bridle for an old mule._

A vieux comptes nouvelles disputes. _Old reckonings breed new disputes._

Avoir des amis en paradis et en enfer. _To have friends both in heaven
and hell._


B.

Bâton porte paix. _A stick is a peacemaker._

Battre le chien devant le lion. _To beat the dog in presence of the
lion._

Beaucoup de mémoire et peu de jugement. _Much memory and little
judgment._

Beauté et folie sont souvent en compagnie. _Beauty and folly are often
companions._

Belle, bonne, riche, et sage, est une femme en quatre étages. _Fair,
good, rich, and wise, is a woman four stories high._

Belle chose est tôt ravie. _Fair things are soon snatched away._

Belle fille et méchante robe trouvent toujours qui les accroche. _A
fine girl and a tattered gown always find something to hook them._

Belle hôtesse c’est un mal pour la bourse. _A handsome hostess is bad
for the purse._

Belle promesse fol lie. _A fair promise binds a fool._

Besoin fait vieille trotter. _Need makes the old woman trot._

Bien embarrassé celui qui tient la queue de la poële. _He has enough to
do who holds the handle of the frying-pan._

Bien dire fait rire; bien faire fait taire. _Saying well causes a
laugh; doing well produces silence._

Bien est larron qui larron dérobe. _He is a thief indeed who robs a
thief._

Bien nourri et mal appris. _Well fed but ill taught._

Bien vient à mieux, et mieux à mal. _Good comes to better, and better
to bad._

Boire et manger, coucher ensemble, c’est mariage, ce me semble. _To eat
and drink, and sleep together, is marriage, methinks._

Bon avocat, mauvais voisin. _A good lawyer is a bad neighbour._

Bon charretier tourne en petit lieu. _A good driver turns in a small
space._

Bon chien chasse de race. _A good dog hunts by instinct._

Bon droit a besoin d’aide. _A good cause needs help._

Bon fait voler bas à cause des branches. _It is well to fly low on
account of the branches._

Bon gaignage fait bon potage. _Fat pastures make fat venison._

Bon guet chasse malaventure. _Good watching drives away ill-luck._

Bon jour bonne ”oe]uvre. _The better day the better deed._

Bonjour lunettes, adieu fillettes. _Good morrow spectacles, farewell
lasses._

Bon nageur de n’être noyé n’est pas sûr. _A good swimmer is not safe
against drowning._

Bonne bête s’échauffe en mangeant. _A good beast heats with eating._

Bonne epée, point querelleur. _A good swordsman is never quarrelsome._

Bonne est la maille qui sauve le denier. _’Tis a good farthing that
saves a penny._

Bonne journée fait qui de fol se délivre. _He does a good day’s work
who rids himself of a fool._

Bonne renommée vaut mieux que ceinture dorée. _Good repute is better
than a golden belt._

Bon sang ne peut mentir. _Good blood will never lie._

Bons mots n’épargnent nuls. _Witticisms spare no one._

Bons nageurs sont à la fin noyés. _Good swimmers are drowned at last._

Bouche serrée, mouche n’y entre. _No flies get into a shut mouth._

Bourdes vrayes ne plaisent jamais. _True jokes never please._

Brebis comptées, le loup les mange. _Counted sheep are eaten by the
wolf._

Brebis qui bêle perd sa goulée. _The sheep that bleats loses its
mouthful._

Brebis trop apprivoisée de trop d’agneaux est tettée. _The sheep that
is too tame is sucked by too many lambs._

Bûche tortue fait bon feu. _A crooked log makes a good fire._


C.

Calomniez, calomniez: il en reste toujours quelque chose. _Slander!
slander! some of it always sticks._

Cela fait venir de l’eau au moulin. _That brings water to the mill._

Celui à bon gage du chat qui en tient la peau. _He has a good pledge of
the cat who has her skin._

Celui est homme de bien qui est homme de biens. _A good man is a man of
goods._

Celui gouverne bien mal le miel qui n’en taste et ses doigts n’en
lèche. _He is a very bad manager of honey who leaves nothing to lick
off his fingers._

Celui peut hardiment nager à qui l’on soutient le menton. _He may swim
boldly who is held up by the chin._

Celui qui est adonné aux dez, le diable le tire par le nez. _The devil
leads him by the nose who the dice too often throws._

Celui qui est sur les épaules d’un géant voit plus loin que celui qui
le porte. _He who rides on the giant’s shoulders sees further than he
who carries him._

Celui qui tient la queue de la poële risque de se brûler. _He that
holds the handle of the frying-pan runs the risk of burning himself._

Ce ne sont pas les plus belles qui font les grandes passions. _It is
not the greatest beauties that inspire the most profound passion._

Ce n’est pas tout que des choux, il faut encore de la graisse. _It is
not enough to have cabbage, one must have something to grease it._

Ce n’est rien, c’est une femme qui se noye. _It is nothing at all, only
a woman drowning._

Cent ans bannière, cent ans civière. _A hundred years a banner, a
hundred years a barrow._ ”_A very old proverb, signifying the changeful
fortunes of great feudal families._]

Cent ans de chagrin ne payent pas un sou de dettes. _A hundred years of
fretting will not pay a halfpenny of debt._

Cent ans n’est guère, mais jamais c’est beaucoup. _A hundred years is
not much, but never is a long while._

Cependant le bonhomme n’a pas son sac. _But for all that the honest man
has not got his purse._

Ce que fait la louve plaît au loup. _What the she-wolf does (or brings
forth) pleases the he-wolf._

Ce que femme veut Dieu le veut. _What a woman wills God wills._

Ce que le gantelet gagne le gorgeret le mange. _What the gauntlet wins
the gorget consumes._

Ce que l’enfant oit au foyer est bientôt connu jusqu’au moustier. _What
the child hears at the fireside is soon known at the parish church._

Ce que le sobre tient au c”oe]ur est sur la langue du buveur. _What the
sober man keeps in his heart is on the tongue of the drunkard._

Ce que moine pense, il ose le faire. _What a monk thinks he dares to
do._

Ce qu’”oe]il ne voit, au c”oe]ur ne deult. _What the eye sees not the
heart rues not._

Ce que poulain prend en jeunesse il le continue en vieillesse. _What
the colt learns in youth he continues in old age._

Ce qui est différé n’est pas perdu. _All is not lost that is delayed._

Ce qui nuit à l’un duit à l’autre. _What is bad for one is good for
another._

Ce qui suffit ne fut jamais peu. _What is enough was never little._

Ce qui vient de la flûte s’en retourne au tambour. _What comes from the
fife goes back to the drum._ (_Lightly come, lightly go; or, what is
got over the devil’s back is spent under his belly._)

Ce qu’on apprend au berceau dure jusqu’au tombeau. _What is learned in
the cradle lasts till the grave._

Ce sont les pires bourdes que les vraies. _The worst jests are those
that are true._

C’est folie de béer contre un four. _It is folly to gape against an
oven._

C’est folie de faire son médecin son héritier. _He is a fool who makes
his physician his heir._

C’est folie de faire un maillet de son poing. _He is a fool who makes a
mallet of his fist._

C’est la cour du roi Petaud, chacun y est maître. _Like King Petaud’s
court, where every one is master._

C’est la maîtresse-roue qui fait tourner le moulin. _It is the
master-wheel that makes the mill go round._

C’est le chien de Jean de Nivelle, il s’enfuit quand on l’appelle. _He
is like Jean de Nivelle’s dog, that runs away when he is called._

C’est le ton qui fait la musique. _It is the tone that makes the music._

C’est le valet du diable, il fait plus qu’on ne lui commande. _He is
the devil’s valet, he does more than he is ordered._

C’est partout comme chez nous. _’Tis everywhere the same as here._

C’est peu que de courir, il faut partir à point. _It is not enough to
run; one must start in time._

C’est quand l’enfant est baptisé qu’il arrive des parrains. _When the
child is christened you will have godfathers enough._

C’est toujours la plus mauvaise roue qui crie. _The worst wheel always
creaks most._

C’est trop aimer quand on en meurt. _It is loving too much to die of
love._

C’est un cheval à quatre pieds blancs. _He is a horse with four white
feet (i.e., he is unlucky)._

C’est un long jour qu’un jour sans pain. _’Tis a long day a day without
bread._

Chacun à son goût. _Every man to his taste._

Chacun a un fou dans sa manche. _Every one has a fool in his sleeve._

Chacun chien qui aboye ne mord pas. _Not every dog that barks bites._

Chacun dit: J’ai bon droit. _Every one says: My right is good._

Chacun doit balayer devant sa porte. _Every one should sweep before his
own door._

Chacun le sien, ce n’est pas trop. _Every one his own, is but fair._

Chacun n’est pas aise qui danse. _Not every one that dances is glad._

Chacun porte sa croix. _Every one bears his cross._

Chacun pour soi et Dieu pour tous. _Every one for himself and God for
all._

Chacun prêche pour son saint. _Every one preaches for his own saint._

Chacun prend son plaisir où il le trouve. _Every one takes his pleasure
where he finds it._

Chacun se fait fouetter à sa guise. _Every one takes his flogging in
his own way._

Chacun sent le mieux où le soulier le blesse. _Every one knows best
where the shoe pinches him._

Chacun son métier, et les vaches seront bien gardées. _Let every one
mind his own business, and the cows will be well tended._

Chacun tire l’eau à son moulin. _Every one draws the water to his own
mill._

Chacun vaut son prix. _Every man has his value._

Changer son cheval borgne contre un aveugle. _To exchange a one-eyed
horse for a blind one._

Chaque demain apporte son pain. _Every to-morrow brings its bread._

Chaque potier vante son pot. _Every potter vaunts his own pot._

Chaque médaille a son revers. _Every medal has its reverse._

Charbonnier est maître chez soi. _The coalheaver is master at home._

Charité bien ordonnée commence par soi-même. _Well-regulated charity
begins with one’s self._

Château abattu est moitié refait. _A mansion pulled down is half built
up again._

Chat échaudé craint l’eau froide. _A scalded cat dreads cold water._

Chercher midi à quatorze heures. _To look for noon at fourteen o’clock._

Chercher une aiguille dans une botte de foin. _To look for a needle in
a bundle of hay._

Cherté foisonne. _Dearness gluts._

Cheval rogneux n’a cure qu’on l’étrille. _A galled horse does not care
to be curried._

Chien affamé, de bastonnade n’est intimidé. _A hungry dog is not afraid
of a cudgelling._

Chien enragé ne peut longuement vivre. _A mad dog cannot live long._

Chien hargneux a toujours l’oreille déchirée. _Snarling curs never want
sore ears._

Chien qui aboie ne mord pas. _Barking dogs don’t bite._

Chien sur son fumier est hardi. _Every dog is valiant in his own
kennel._

Chose perdue, chose connue. _A thing lost is a thing known._

Choses promises sont choses dues. _Things promised are things due._

Chose trop vue n’est chère tenue. _A thing too much seen is little
prized._

Chou pour chou. _Cabbage for cabbage._

Comme on fait son lit on se couche. _As you make your bed so you must
lie on it._

Communautés commencent par bâtir leur cuisine. _Communities begin by
building their kitchen._

Compagnon bien parlant vaut en chemin chariot branlant. _A pleasant
companion on a journey is as good as a postchaise._

Comparaison n’est pas raison. _Comparison is not proof._

Comparaisons sont odieuses. _Comparisons are odious._

Contre coignée serrure ne peut. _No lock avails against a hatchet._

Couard souvent coup mortel au preux donne. _A coward often deals a
mortal blow to the brave._

Coudre la peau du renard à celle du lion. _To sew the fox’s skin to the
lion’s._

Courte messe et long dîner. _A short mass and a long dinner._

Courtoisie qui ne vient que d’un côté ne peut longuement durer.
_Courtesy that is all on one side cannot last long._

Craignez la colère de la colombe. _Dread the anger of the dove._

Crier famine sur un tas de bled. _To cry famine on a heap of corn._

Croyez cela et buvez de l’eau. _Believe that, and drink some water (to
wash it down.)_


D.

Dans la nuit tous chats sont gris. _All cats are alike grey at night._

Débander l’arc ne guérit pas la plaie. _Unstringing the bow does not
cure the wound._

De court plaisir long repentir. _From short pleasure long repentance._

Découvrir saint Pierre pour couvrir saint Paul. _To strip St. Peter to
clothe St. Paul._

De demain à demain le temps s’en va bien loin. _From to-morrow till
to-morrow time goes a long journey._

De deux maux il faut choisir le moindre. _Of two evils choose the
least._

De deux regardeurs il y en a toujours un qui devient joueur. _Of two
lookers on one is sure to become a player._

De fol juge brève sentence. _A foolish judge passes brief sentence._
(_A fool’s bolt is soon shot._)

De forte coûture forte déchirure. _The stronger the seam the worse the
rent._

De grande montée, grande chute. _The higher the rise the greater the
fall._

De gerbe remuée chet le grain. _The corn falls out of a shaken sheaf._

De jeune angelot vieux diable. _A young angel, an old devil._

De la main à la bouche se perd souvent la soupe. _Between the hand
and the mouth the soup is often spilt._ (_’Twixt the cup and the lip
there’s many a slip._)

De la panse vient la danse. _A full belly sets a man jigging._

De maigre poil âpre morsure. _A gaunt brute bites sore._

Demander de la laine à un âne. _To ask wool of an ass._

Demandez-le à mon compagnon, qui est aussi menteur que moi. _Ask my
comrade, who is as great a liar as myself._

Deniers avancent les bediers. _Money advances meacocks._

De oui et non vient toute question. _Out of yes and no comes all
dispute._

Dépends le pendard et il te pendra. _Take down a rogue from the gallows
and he will hang you up._

De peu de drap courte cape. _Of little cloth but a short cloak._

De qui je me fie Dieu me garde. _God save me from those I trust in._

Derrière la croix souvent se tient le diable. _The devil often lurks
behind the cross._

De toute taille bon chien. _There are good dogs of all sizes._

De tout s’avise à qui pain faut. _A man who wants bread is ready for
anything._

Deux hommes se rencontrent bien, mais jamais deux montagnes. _Two men
may meet, but never two mountains._

Deux moineaux sur même épi ne sont pas long-temps unis. _Two sparrows
on the same ear of corn are not long friends._

Dieu aide à trois sortes de personnes: aux fous, aux enfants, et aux
ivrognes. _God helps three sorts of people: fools, children, and
drunkards._

Dieu donne le froid selon le drap. _God gives the cold according to the
cloth._

Dieu garde la lune des loups. _God saves the moon from the wolves._

Dieu sait qui est bon pélerin. _God knows who is a good pilgrim._

Dieu seul devine les sots. _God alone understands fools._

Dieu vous garde d’un homme qui n’a qu’une affaire. _God save you from a
man who has but one business._

Dis-moi qui tu hantes, je te dirai qui tu es. _Tell me the company you
keep, and I will tell you who you are._

Dites toujours fanfare, vous ne mourrez jamais. _Always talk big and
you will never be forgotten._

Dites toujours nenni, vous ne serez jamais mariée. _Always say no, and
you will never be married._

D’oiseaux, de chiens, d’armes, d’amours, pour un plaisir mille
doulours. _In hawks, hounds, arms, and love, for one pleasure a
thousand pains._

Donner de l’eau bénite de cour. _To give court holy-water._

Donner une chandelle à Dieu et une au diable. _To offer one candle to
God and another to the devil._

Donner un ”oe]uf pour avoir un b”oe]uf. _To give an egg to get an ox._

Dormir une heure avant minuit vaut mieux que trois après. _One hour’s
sleep before midnight is better than three after it._

Douce parole n’écorche pas langue. _Soft words don’t scotch the tongue._

Du cuir d’un vieux mari on en achète un jeune. _With an old husband’s
hide one buys a young one._

Du dire au fait il y a grand trait. _’Twixt the word and the deed
there’s a long step._

Du larron privé on ne peut se garder. _There’s no guarding against the
privy thief._

D’une vache perdue c’est quelque chose de recouvrer la queue, ne
fût-ce que pour faire un tirouer à son huis. _When a cow is lost it is
something to recover its tail, were it only to make a handle for one’s
door._

D’un sac à charbon ne saurait sortir de blanche farine. _White meal is
not got out of a coal-sack._


E.

Ecorcher l’anguille par la queue. _To begin skinning the eel at the
tail._

Elève le corbeau, il te crèvera les yeux. _Bring up a raven and he will
peck out your eyes._

Enfants et fous sont devins. _Children and fools are prophets._

En fin les renards se trouvent chez le pelletier. _Foxes come at last
to the furrier’s._

En forgeant on devient forgeron. _By working in the smithy one becomes
a smith._

En grand fardeau n’est pas l’acquêt. _The greatest burdens are not the
gainfullest._

En la cour du roi chacun y est pour soi. _At the king’s court every one
for himself._

En la maison du ménétrier chacun est danseur. _In the fiddler’s house
every one is a dancer._

En mariage trompe qui peut. _In marriage cheat who can._

Ennemi ne s’endort. _An enemy does not sleep._

En petit champ croît bien bon bled. _Very good corn grows in little
fields._

En petites boîtes met-on les bons onguents. _Precious ointments are put
in small boxes._

En peu d’heure Dieu labeure. _God’s work is soon done._

En sûreté dort qui n’a que perdre. _He sleeps securely who has nothing
to lose._

Entre deux selles le cul à terre. _Between two stools the breech comes
to the ground._

Entre promettre et donner doit-on marier sa fille. _Between promising
and giving a man should marry his daughter._

En vaisseau mal lavé ne peut-on vin garder. _Wine will not keep in a
foul vessel._

Envie passe avarice. _Envy goes beyond avarice._

Erreur n’est pas compte. _A mistake is no reckoning._

Est assez riche qui ne doit rien. _He is rich enough who owes nothing._

Evêque d’or, crosse de bois; crosse d’or, évêque de bois. _Golden
bishop, wooden crosier; wooden bishop, golden crosier._


F.

Face d’homme porte vertu. _There’s virtue in a man’s face (i.e.,
presence carries weight)._

Faire bonne mine à mauvais jeu. _To put a good face on a bad game._

Faire comme le singe, tirer les marrons du feu avec la patte du chat.
_To do like the monkey, get the chesnuts out of the fire with the cat’s
paw._

Faire de nécessité vertu. _To make a virtue of necessity._

Faire des châteaux en Espagne. _To build castles in the air._

Faire du cuir d’autrui large courroie. _To cut broad thongs from
another man’s leather._

Faire d’une pierre deux coups. _To make two hits with one stone._

Faire un trou pour en boucher un autre. _To make one hole by way of
stopping another._

Faisant son office la balance, d’or ni de plomb n’a connaissance. _The
balance in doing its office knows neither gold nor lead._

Fais ce que dois, advienne que pourra. _Do what you ought, come what
may._

Fais-moi la barbe et je te ferai le toupet. _Trim my beard and I will
trim your topknot._

Femme, argent, et vin, ont leur bien et leur venin. _Women, money, and
wine have their balm and their harm._

Femme et melon à peine les connaît-on. _A woman and a melon are hard to
choose._

Femme qui beaucoup se mire peu file. _A woman who looks much in the
glass spins but little._

Femme qui prend, se vend; femme qui donne, s’abandonne. _A woman who
accepts, sells herself; a woman who gives, surrenders._

Femme rit quand elle peut, et pleure quand elle veut. _A woman laughs
when she can, and weeps when she pleases._

Femme sotte se cognoit à la cotte. _A foolish woman is known by her
finery._

Fiançailles vont en selle et repentailles en croupe. _Wedlock rides in
the saddle and repentance on the crupper._

Fi de manteau quand il fait beau. _Fie upon a cloak in fair weather._

Fille oisive, à mal pensive. _A girl unemployed is thinking of
mischief._

Fin contre fin. _Diamond cut diamond._

Fin contre fin n’est pas bon pour faire doublure. _Fine and fine make
but a slender doublet._

Foi de gentilhomme, un autre gage vaut mieux. _The word of honour of a
gentleman—another pledge would be better._

Folle est la brebis qui au loup se confesse. _’Tis a silly sheep that
makes the wolf her confessor._

Force n’a pas droit. _Might knows no right._

Fou qui se tait passe pour sage. _The fool who is silent passes for
wise._

Fumée, pluie, et femme sans raison, chassent l’homme de sa maison.
_Smoke, floods, and a troublesome wife, are enough to drive a man out
of his life._


G.

Gâteau et mauvaise coutume se doivent rompre. _A cake and a bad custom
ought to be broken._

Gâter une chandelle pour trouver une épingle. _To burn out a candle in
search of a pin._

Gentilhomme de Beauce qui reste au lit pendant qu’on raccommode ses
chausses. _A gentleman of Beauce who stays in bed till his breeches are
mended._

Goutte à goutte emplit la cuve. _Drop by drop fills the tub._

Goutte à goutte la pierre se creuse. _Drop by drop wears away the
stone._

Graissez les bottes d’un vilain, il dira qu’on les lui brûle. _Grease a
churl’s boots and he’ll say you are burning them._

Grand besoin a de fol qui de soi-même le fait. _He has great need of a
fool who makes himself one._

Grand bien ne vient pas en peu d’heures. _A great estate is not gotten
in a few hours._

Grande chère petit testament. _A fat kitchen makes a lean will._

Grande dispute vérité rebute. _Great disputing repels truth._

Grand parleur grand menteur. _A great talker is a great liar._

Grands oiseaux de coutume sont privés de leurs plumes. _Fine birds are
commonly plucked._

Grand vanteur, petit faiseur. _Great boaster, little doer._

Grosse tête, peu de sens. _Big head, little wit._


H.

Habillé comme un moulin à vent. _Dressed like a windmill._

Habille-toi lentement quand tu es pressé. _Dress slowly when you are in
a hurry._

Hardiment heurte à la porte qui bonne nouvelle y apporte. _He knocks
boldly at the door who brings good news._

Hâtez-vous lentement. _Hasten leisurely._

Heureux commencement est la moitié de l’”oe]uvre. _Well begun is half
done._

Heureux sont les enfants dont les pères sont damnés. _Happy the child
whose father goes to the devil._

Homme assailli à demi vaincu. _A man assailed is half overcome._

Homme chiche jamais riche. _A stingy man is always poor._

Homme matineux, sain, alègre, et soigneux. _The early riser is healthy,
cheerful, and industrious._

Homme ne connaît mieux la malice que l’abbé qui a été moine. _No man
understands knavery better than the abbot who has been a monk._

Homme plaideur, menteur. _A litigious man, a liar._

Honnête pauvreté est clair semée. _Honest poverty is thinly sown._

Honneur fleurit sur la fosse. _Honour blossoms on the grave._


I.

Il a battu les buissons et un autre a pris les oisillons. _He beat the
bushes and another caught the birds._

Il a beau se lever matin qui a le renom de dormir la grasse matinée.
_It is in vain for a man to rise early who has the repute of lying in
bed all the morning._

Il a beau se taire de l’escot qui ne paie rien. _He needs say nothing
about the score who pays nothing._

Il advient souvent en un jour ce qui n’advient en cent ans. _That often
happens in a day which does not happen in a hundred years._

Il a mangé son blé en herbe. _He has eaten his corn in the blade._

Il a mis tous ses ”oe]ufs dans un panier. _He has put all his eggs into
one basket._

Il attend que les alouettes lui tombent toutes rôties dans le bec. _He
expects that larks will fall ready roasted into his mouth._

Il cherche son âne et il est monté dessus. _He looks for his ass and
sits on its back._

Il est avis au renard que chacun mange poules comme lui. _The fox
thinks everybody eats poultry like himself._

Il est avis à vieille vache qu’elle ne fût oncques veau. _It is the old
cow’s notion that she never was a calf._

Il est bien aisé d’aller à pied quand on tient son cheval par la bride.
_It is pleasant enough going afoot when you lead your horse by the
bridle._

Il est bien fou qui s’oublie. _He is a great fool who forgets himself._

Il est bon d’avoir des amis partout. _It is good to have friends in all
parts._

Il est comme le chien du jardinier, qui ne mange point de choux, et
n’en laisse pas manger aux autres. _He is like the gardener’s dog, who
don’t eat cabbages and will let no one else eat them._

Il est dit habile, qui fraude ami et pile. _He is called clever who
cheats and plunders his friend._

Il est du naturel du chat, il retombe toujours sur ses pieds. _He is
like a cat, he always falls on his feet._

Il est juste que le prêtre vive de l’autel. _It is just that the priest
should live by the altar._

Il est né coiffé. _He was born with a caul._

Il est né dimanche, il aime besogne faite. _He was born on a Sunday, he
likes work ready done._

Il est plus aisé de se tirer de la rive que du fond. _It is easier to
get away from the bank than the bottom._

Il est tout prêché qui n’a cure de bien faire. _He is past preaching to
who does not care to do well._

Il est trop tard de fermer l’écurie quand les chevaux sont pris. _It is
too late to lock the stable-door when the steeds are stolen._

Il fait bien mauvais au bois quand les loups se mangent l’un l’autre.
_Very hard times in the wood when the wolves eat each other._

Il fait bon battre l’orgueilleux quand il est seul. _It is good to beat
a proud man when he is alone._

Il fait toujours bon tenir son cheval par la bride. _It is always well
to keep hold of your horse’s bridle._

Il faut amadouer la poule pour avoir les poussins. _To get the chicks
one must coax the hen._

Il faut avaler les pilules sans les mâcher. _Pills must be swallowed
without chewing._

Il faut battre le fer tandis qu’il est chaud. _Strike while the iron is
hot._

Il faut bien laisser le jeu quand il est beau. _It is well to leave off
playing when the game is at its best._

Il faut casser la noix pour manger le noyau. _He that would eat the
kernel must crack the nut._

Il faut être enclume ou marteau. _One must be either anvil or hammer._

Il faut faire ce qu’on fait. _What you are doing do thoroughly. (Age
quod agis.)_

Il faut gratter les gens par où il leur démange. _Scratch people where
they itch._

Il faut hurler avec les loups. _One must howl with the wolves._

Il faut laisser l’enfant morveux plutôt que lui arracher le nez. _It is
better to leave the child’s nose dirty than wring it off._

Il faut laver son linge sale en famille. _Foul linen should be washed
at home._

Il faut louer la mer et se tenir en terre. _Praise the sea, and keep on
land._

Il faut passer par la porte ou par la fenêtre. _One must pass through
the door or the window._

Il faut perdre un véron pour pêcher un saumon. _One must lose a minnow
to catch a salmon._

Il faut placer le clocher au milieu du village. _Put the belfry in the
middle of the village._

Il faut prendre le bénéfice avec les charges. _The benefice must be
taken with its liabilities._

Il faut que tout le monde vive. _Everybody must live._

Il faut qu’une porte soit ouverte ou fermée. _A door must either be
open or shut._

Il faut reculer pour mieux sauter. _One must step back to make the
better leap._

Il faut se défier d’un ennemi réconcilié. _Beware of a reconciled
enemy. (Take heed of an enemy reconciled.)_

Il faut se dire beaucoup d’amis et s’en croire peu. _Give out that you
have many friends, and believe that you have but few._

Il faut tendre voile selon le vent. _Set your sail according to the
wind._

Il faut tondre les brebis et non les écorchier. _Shear the sheep but
don’t flay them._

Il faut tourner sept fois sa langue dans sa bouche avant de parler.
_Turn your tongue seven times before speaking._

Il faut vouloir ce qu’on ne peut empêcher. _One must needs like what
one cannot hinder._

Il ment comme un arracheur de dents. _He lies like a toothdrawer._

Il met sa faucille dans la moisson d’autrui. _He puts his sickle into
another man’s harvest._

Il n’a rien oublié, sinon de dire adieu. _He forgot nothing except to
say farewell._

Il ne choisit pas qui emprunte. _Borrowers must not be choosers._

Il ne faut jamais défier un fou de mal faire. _Never challenge a fool
to do wrong._

Il ne faut pas badiner avec le feu. _It won’t do to trifle with fire._

Il ne faut pas chômer les fêtes avant qu’elles ne soient venues. _It
will not do to keep holidays before they come._

Il ne faut pas clocher devant les boiteux. _Never limp before the lame._

Il ne faut pas dire: Fontaine, je ne boirai pas de ton eau. _Never say,
Fountain, I will not drink of thy water._

Il ne faut pas enseigner les poissons à nager. _Don’t teach fishes to
swim._

Il ne faut pas faire d’un diable deux. _Do not make two devils of one._

Il ne faut pas faire passer tous les chats pour des sorciers. _All cats
are not to be set down for witches._

Il ne faut pas jeter des pierres dans le jardin de ton voisin. _You
must not throw stones into your neighbour’s garden._

Il ne faut pas laisser de semer pour crainte des pigeons. _Do not
abstain from sowing for fear of the pigeons._

Il ne faut pas lier les ânes avec les chevaux. _Asses must not be tied
up with horses._

Il ne faut pas mettre le doigt entre l’arbre et l’écorce. _Never put
your finger between the tree and the bark._

Il ne faut pas parler latin devant les cordeliers. _Don’t talk Latin
before the Franciscans._

Il ne faut pas se moquer des chiens qu’on ne soit hors du village.
_Don’t snap your fingers at the dogs before you are out of the village._

Il ne faut pas s’en rapporter à l’étiquette du sac. _Don’t rely on the
label of the bag._

Il ne faut pas vendre la peau de l’ours avant de l’avoir mis par terre.
_Never sell the bearskin till you have killed the bear._

Il ne faut point parler de corde dans la maison d’un pendu. _Never
speak of a rope in the house of one who was hanged._

Il ne faut point se dépouiller avant de se coucher. _Do not strip
before bedtime._

Il ne faut que tourner le dos à Dieu pour devenir riche. _To grow rich
one has only to turn his back on God._

Il ne faut qu’une brebis galeuse pour gâter tout le troupeau. _One
scabby sheep is enough to spoil the whole flock._

Il ne faut rien dérober que la bourse d’un avocat. _One may steal
nothing save a lawyer’s purse._

Il ne perdra pas l’avoine faute de brailler. _He will not lose his oats
for want of braying._

Il ne se garde pas bien qui ne se garde toujours. _He does not guard
himself well who is not always on his guard._

Il n’est banquet que d’homme chiche. _No feast like a miser’s._

Il n’est chasse que de vieux chiens. _There is no hunting but with old
hounds._

Il n’est cheval qui n’ait sa tare. _’Tis a good horse that has no
fault._

Il n’est orgueil que de pauvre enrichi. _There is no pride like that of
a beggar grown rich._

Il n’est pas échappé qui traîne son lien. _He is not escaped who drags
his chain._

Il n’est pas si diable qu’il est noir. _He is not so much of a devil as
he is black._

Il n’est pire eau que l’eau qui dort. _There is no worse water than
that which sleeps._

Il n’est pire sourd que celui qui ne veut pas entendre. _None so deaf
as he that won’t hear._

Il n’est point de belles prisons ni de laides amours. _Never seemed a
prison fair or mistress foul._

Il n’est que d’avoir la clef des champs. _There’s nothing like having
the key of the fields._

Il n’est que d’être crotté pour affronter le bourbier. _There’s nothing
like being bespattered for making a man defy the gutter._

Il n’est rien si bien fait où l’on ne trouve à redire. _There is
nothing so well done but may be mended._

Il n’est secret que de rien dire. _The only way to keep a secret is to
say nothing._

Il n’est si bon charretier qui ne verse. _The best driver will
sometimes upset._

Il n’est si grand dépit que de pauvre orgueilleux. _There is no spite
like that of a proud beggar._

Il n’est si petite chapelle qui n’ait son saint. _There is no chapel so
small but has its saint._

Il n’est si riche festin, où il n’y ait quelqu’un qui mal dîne. _There
never was a banquet so sumptuous but some one dined ill at it._

Il n’y a cheval si bien ferré qui ne glisse. _Be a horse ever so well
shod, he may slip._

Il n’y a cheval si bon qui ne bronche. _It is a good horse that never
stumbles._

Il n’y a ni rime ni raison. _There’s neither rhyme nor reason._

Il n’y a pas de gens plus affairés que ceux qui ne font rien. _None so
busy as those who do nothing._

Il n’y a pas de miroir au monde qui ait jamais dit à une femme qu’elle
était laide. _There never was a looking-glass that told a woman she was
ugly._

Il n’y a pas de sots métiers, il n’y a que de sottes gens. _There are
no foolish trades, there are only foolish people._

Il n’y a plus d’enfans. _There are no children now-a-days._

Il n’y a point d’amour sans jalousie. _There is no love without
jealousy._

Il n’y a point de héros pour son valet de chambre. _No man is a hero in
the eyes of his valet._

Il n’y a point de petit ennemi. _There is no such thing as an
insignificant enemy._

Il n’y a que la première bouteille qui est chère. _It is only the first
bottle that is dear._

Il n’y a que le premier pas qui coûte. _The first step is all the
difficulty._

Il n’y a que les bons marchés qui ruinent. _It is only good bargains
that ruin._

Il n’y a que les honteux qui perdent. _It is only the bashful that
lose._

Il n’y a qu’heur et malheur en ce monde. _All is luck or ill luck in
this world._

Il n’y a rien de fait tant qu’il reste à faire. _Nothing is done while
something remains undone._

Il n’y a rien si hardi que la chemise d’un meunier. _Nothing so bold
as a miller’s shirt (because it takes a thief by the throat every
morning)._

Il n’y a sauce que d’appétit. _No sauce like appetite._

Il n’y a si bel acquêt que le don. _No purchase like a gift._

Il n’y a si bonne compagnie qui ne se quitte, comme disait le roi
Dagobert à ses chiens. _The best company must part, as King Dagobert
said to his hounds._

Il n’y a si grand jour qui ne vienne pas a vêpres. _No day so long but
has its evening._

Il n’y a si méchant pot qui ne trouve son couvercle. _There is no pot
so bad but finds its cover._

Il n’y a si petit buisson qui n’ait son ombre. _There is no bush so
small but casts its shadow._

Il n’y eut jamais bon marché de peaux de lions. _Lion-skins were never
had cheap._

Il porte le deuil de sa blanchisseuse. _He wears the mourning of his
washerwoman._

Il porte le feu et l’eau. _He carries fire and water._

Il ressemble à chat brûlé, il vaut mieux qu’il ne se prise. _He is like
a singed cat, better than he looks._

Il se ruine à promettre, et s’acquitte à ne rien donner. _He ruins
himself in promises, and clears himself by giving nothing._

Il tombe sur le dos et se casse le nez. _He falls on his back and
breaks his nose._

Il vaut mieux avoir affaire à Dieu qu’à ses saints. _It is better to
have to do with God than with his saints._

Il vaut mieux être fou avec tous que sage tout seul. _Better be mad
with all the world than wise alone._

Il vaut mieux être le premier de sa race que le dernier. _It is better
to be the first of one’s race than the last (meanest)._]

Il vaut mieux être marteau qu’enclume. _It is better to be the hammer
than the anvil._

Il vaut mieux faire envie que pitié. _Better to be envied than pitied._

Il vaut mieux plier que rompre. _It is better to bend than break._

Il vaut mieux trébucher une fois que toujours chanceler. _Better to
stumble once than be always tottering._

Il y a des calomnies contre lesquelles l’innocence même perd courage.
_There are calumnies against which even innocence loses courage._

Il y a des hochets pour tous les ages. _There are toys for all ages._

Il y a fagot et fagot. _There are fagots and fagots (all are not
alike)._

Il y a plus de fols acheteurs que de fols vendeurs. _There are more
foolish buyers than foolish sellers._

Il y a remède à tout fors à la mort. _There is a remedy for everything
but death._


J.

J’aime mieux un raisin pour moi que deux figues pour toi. _Rather a
single grape for me than a brace of figs for thee._

Jamais bon chien n’aboie à faux. _A good dog never barks at fault._

Jamais chapon n’aima géline. _Never did capon love a hen._

Jamais chat emmitouflé ne prit souris. _A muffled cat never caught a
mouse._

Jamais coup de pied de jument ne fit mal à un cheval. _A kick from a
mare never hurt a horse._

Jamais grand nez n’a gâté joli visage. _A big nose never spoiled a
handsome face._

Jamais honteux n’eut belle amie. _Faint heart never won fair lady._

Jamais la cornemuse ne dit mot si elle n’a le ventre plein. _The
bagpipe never utters a word till its belly is full._

Jean a étudié pour être bête. _John has been to school to learn to be a
fool._

Je ne vis oncques riche muet. _I never saw a silent rich man._

Je sais à mon pot comment les autres bouillent. _I know by my own pot
how the others boil._

Jeter le manche après la cognée. _To throw the helve after the hatchet._

Jeux de mains jeu de vilains. _Manual jokes are clown’s jokes._

Joyeuse vie père et mère oublie. _A merry life forgets father and
mother._


L.

L’abattu veut toujours lutter. _He that is thrown would still wrestle._

La belle cage ne nourrit pas l’oiseau. _A fine cage won’t feed the
bird._

La belle plume fait le bel oiseau. _Fine feathers make fine birds._

La borne sied très bien entre les champs de deux frères. _A landmark is
very well placed between the fields of two brothers._

La brebis sur la montagne est plus haute que le taureau dans la plaine.
_The sheep on the mountain is higher than the bull on the plain._

La caque sent toujours le hareng. _The cask always smells of the
herring._

La chandelle qui va devant vaut mieux que celle qui va derrière. _The
candle that goes before is better than that which comes after._

L’adresse surmonte la force. _Policy goes beyond strength._

La faim chasse le loup hors du bois. _Hunger drives the wolf out of the
wood._

La faim regarde à la porte de l’homme laborieux, mais elle n’ose pas
entrer. _Hunger looks in at the industrious man’s door but dares not
enter._

La farine du diable s’en va moitié en son. _The devil’s meal turns half
to bran._

La faute est grande comme celui qui la commet. _The fault is great in
proportion to him who commits it._

La fête passée, adieu le saint. _The saint’s-day over, farewell the
saint._

La fin couronne l’”oe]uvre. _The end crowns the work._ (_All is well
that ends well._)

La fortune est une femme; si vous la manquez aujourd’hui, ne vous
attendez pas à la retrouver demain. _Fortune is a woman; if you neglect
her to-day, expect not to regain her to-morrow._

La fortune la plus amie vous donne le croc-en-jambe. _The most friendly
fortune trips up your heels._

La fortune ne peut nous ôter que ce qu’elle nous a donné. _Fortune can
take from us only what she has given us._

La gibecière de l’avocat est une bouche d’enfer. _The lawyer’s pouch is
a mouth of hell._

La gloire vaine ne porte graine. _Vainglory bears no grain._

La gourmandise a tué plus de gens que l’épée. _Gluttony has killed more
than the sword._

La guerre fait les larrons, la paix les pend. _War makes robbers, peace
hangs them._

L’aigle ne chasse point aux mouches. _The eagle does not hunt flies._

Laissez le moustier où il est. _Leave the minster where it is._

La jeunesse revient de loin. _Youth may stray afar yet return at last._

La lame use le fourreau. _The blade wears out the sheath._

La langue des femmes est leur épée, et elles ne la laissent pas
rouiller. _A woman’s tongue is her sword, and she does not let it rust._

La langue va où la dent fait mal. _The tongue goes to where the tooth
aches._

La lisière est pire que le drap. _The list is worse than the cloth._

La loi dit ce que le roi veut. _The law says what the king pleases._

La mauvaise garde paît souvent le loup. _Bad watch often feeds the
wolf._

L’ami par intérêt est une hirondelle sur les toits. _The interested
friend is a swallow on the roof._ (_Prepared to leave at the approach
of winter._)

La moitié du monde ne sait comment l’autre vit. _One half the world
knows not how the other half lives._

La moitié du monde se moque de l’autre. _One half the world laughs at
the other._

L’amour apprend aux ânes à danser. _Love teaches asses to dance._

L’amour chasse jalousie. _Love expels jealousy._

L’amour fait passer le temps, et le temps fait passer l’amour. _Love
makes time pass away, and time makes love pass away._

L’amour fait rage, mais l’argent fait mariage. _Love does wonders, but
money makes marriage._

L’âne de la montagne porte le vin et boit de l’eau. _The mountaineer’s
ass carries wine and drinks water._

L’âne du commun est toujours le plus mal bâté. _The ass that is common
property is always the worst saddled._

Langue de miel et c”oe]ur de fiel. _A honeyed tongue with a heart of
gall._

La nuit n’a point d’amis. _Night has no friend._

La nuit porte conseil. _The night brings counsel._

La nuit tous chats sont gris. _By night all cats are grey._

Là où sont les poussins la poule a les yeux. _The hen’s eyes are with
her chickens._

La patience est la vertu des ânes. _Patience is the virtue of asses._

La peau est plus proche que la chemise. _The skin is nearer than the
shirt._

La pelle se moque du fourgon. _The shovel scouts the poker._

La petite aumône est la bonne. _The little alms are the good alms._

La peur est grand inventeur. _Fear is a great inventor._

La plus belle femme ne peut donner que ce qu’elle a. _The handsomest
woman can only give what she has._

La plus grande finesse est de n’en avoir point. _The greatest cunning
is to have none at all._

La pomme est pour le vieux singe. _The old monkey gets the apple._

La poule ne doit pas chanter devant le coq. _The hen ought not to
cackle in presence of the cock._

L’appétit vient en mangeant. _Appetite comes with eating._

La queue est la pire à écorcher. _The tail is the hardest to scourge._

La raison du plus fort est toujours la meilleure. _The arguments of the
strongest have always the most weight._

L’arbre ne tombe pas du premier coup. _The tree does not fall at the
first stroke._

L’argent est un bon serviteur, mais c’est un mauvais maître. _Money is
a good servant but a bad master._

L’argent ne se perd qu’à faute d’argent. _Money is lost only for want
of money._

La rouille use plus que le travail. _Rust wastes more than use._

La seule victoire contre l’amour c’est la fuite. _The only victory over
love is flight._

La vanité n’a pas de plus grand ennemi que la vanité. _Vanity has no
greater foe than vanity._

L’avare et le cochon ne sont bons qu’après leur mort. _The miser and
the pig are of no use till dead._

L’avarice rompt le sac. _Avarice bursts the bag._

La vérité est la massue qui chacun assomme et tue. _Truth is the club
that knocks down and kills everybody._

Lavez chien, peignez chien, toutefois n’est chien que chien. _Wash a
dog, comb a dog, still a dog remains a dog._

La vie est moitié usée avant qu’on ne sache ce qu’est la vie. _Life is
half spent before one knows what life is._

Le beau soulier blesse souvent le pied. _A handsome shoe often pinches
the foot._

Le bedeau de la paroisse est toujours de l’avis de monsieur le curé.
_The beadle of the parish is always of the vicar’s opinion._

Le b”oe]uf par la corne et l’homme par la parole. _Take an ox by his
horn, a man by his word._

Le bossu ne voit pas sa bosse, mais il voit celle de son confrère. _The
hunchback does not see his own hump, but he sees his brother’s._

Le bouton devient rose et la rose gratte-cul. _The bud becomes a rose
and the rose a hip._

Le bruit est si fort qu’on n’entend pas Dieu tonner. _The noise is so
great one cannot hear God thunder._

Le bruit pend l’homme. _Repute hangs a man._

Le chaudron mâchure la poële. _The kettle smuts the frying-pan._

Le c”oe]ur mène où il va. _The heart leads whither it goes._

L’écoutant fait le médisant. _The listener makes the backbiter._

Le dernier venu le mieux aimé. _The last come is the best liked._

Le diable était beau quand il était jeune. _The devil was handsome when
he was young._

Le diable n’est pas toujours à la porte d’un pauvre homme. _The devil
is not always at a poor man’s door._

Le diable pourrait mourir que je n’hériterais pas de ses cornes. _The
devil may die without my inheriting his horns._

Le faux ami ressemble à l’ombre d’un cadran. _The false friend is like
the shadow of a sun-dial._

Le feu le plus couvert est le plus ardent. _The most covered fire is
always the most glowing._

Le fou cherche son malheur. _The fool hunts for misfortune._

Le fou se coupe de son couteau. _The fool cuts himself with his own
knife._

Le jeu ne vaut pas la chandelle. _The game is not worth the candle._

Le lièvre revient toujours à son gite. _The hare always returns to her
form._

Le loup mourra dans sa peau. _The wolf will die in his skin._

Le mal an entre en nageant. _The ill year comes in swimming._

Le mal de l’”oe]il il faut le panser avec le coude. _If you have a sore
eye wipe it with your elbow._ (_Elbow-grease is a great preventive of
disease._)

Le mal vient à cheval et s’en va à pied. _Misfortune comes on horseback
and goes away on foot._

Le médecin est souvent plus à craindre que la maladie. _The doctor is
often more to be feared than the disease._

Le meilleur vin a sa lie. _The best wine has its lees._

Le miel est doux, mais l’abeille pique. _Honey is sweet, but the bee
stings._

Le miel n’est pas pour les ânes. _Honey is not for asses._

Le moine répond comme l’abbé chante. _The monk responds as the abbot
chants._

Le mortier sent toujours les aulx. _The mortar always smells of the
garlic._

Le moulin ne moult pas avec l’eau coulée en bas. _The mill does not
grind with water that is past._

L’empereur d’Allemagne est le roy des roys, le roy d’Espagne roy des
hommes, le roy de France roy des ânes, et le roy d’Angleterre roy
des diables. _The Emperor of Germany is the king of kings, the King
of Spain king of men, the King of France king of asses, the King of
England king of devils._

Le mulet garde longuement un coup de pied à son maître. _The mule long
keeps a kick in reserve for its master._

L’encens entête et tout le monde en veut. _Incense intoxicates and
every one wishes for it._

L’entente est au diseur. _The meaning is best known to the speaker._

Le papier souffre tout. _Paper bears anything._

L’épine en naissant va la pointe devant. _A thorn comes into the world
point foremost._

Le plus riche n’emporte qu’un linceul. _The richest man carries nothing
away with him but a shroud._

Le plus sage est celui qui ne pense point l’être. _He is the wisest man
who does not think himself so._

Le premier coup en vaut deux. _The first blow is as good as two._

Le premier pas engage au second. _The first step binds one to the
second._

Le premier venu engrène. _The first comer grinds first._ (_First come,
first served._)

Le repentir coûte bien cher. _Repentance costs very dear._

Le riche a plus de parents qu’il ne connaît. _The rich man has more
relations than he knows._

Les abeilles ne deviennent point frelons. _Bees do not become hornets._

Les absents ont toujours tort. _The absent are always in the wrong._

Le sac ne fut oncques si plein que n’y entrât bien un grain. _A sack
was never so full but that it would hold another grain._

Les Allemands ont l’esprit aux doigts. _The Germans carry their wit in
their fingers._

Les battus payent l’amende. _The beaten pay the fine._

Les beaux esprits se rencontrent. _Great wits meet._

Les belles ne sont pas pour les beaux. _Belles are not for the beaux._

Les belles robes pleurent sur des épaules indignes. _Rich garments weep
on unworthy shoulders._

Les bons comptes font les bons amis. _Short reckonings make long
friends._

Les bons marchés ruinent. _Good bargains are ruinous._

Les chevaux courent les bénéfices et les ânes les attrapent. _Horses
run after benefices and asses get them._

Les cloches appellent à l’église mais n’y entrent pas. _Bells call to
church but do not enter._

Les conseillers ne sont pas les payeurs. _Advisers are not the payers._

Les corbeaux ne crèvent pas les yeux aux corbeaux. _Ravens do not peck
out ravens’ eyes._

Les cordonniers sont toujours les plus mal chaussés. _Shoemakers are
always the worst shod._

Les derniers venus sont souvent les maîtres. _The last comers are often
the masters._

Les deux font la paire. _The two make a pair._

Les enfants sont ce qu’on les fait. _Children are what they are made._

Les envieux mourront, mais non jamais l’envie. _The envious will die,
but envy never._

Les extrêmes se touchent. _Extremes meet._

Les fous inventent les modes et les sages les suivent. _Fools invent
fashions and wise men follow them._

Les gens fatigués sont querelleurs. _Tired folks are quarrelsome._

Les grands b”oe]ufs ne font pas les grandes journées. _It is not the
big oxen that do the best day’s work._

Les grands clercs ne sont pas les plus fins. _Great scholars are not
the shrewdest men._

Les grands diseurs ne sont pas les grands faiseurs. _Great talkers are
not great doers._

Les gros larrons ont toujours les manches pleines de baillons. _Great
thieves always have their sleeves full of gags._

Les gros larrons pendent les petits. _Great thieves hang the little
ones._

Les gros poissons mangent les petits. _The big fish eat the little
ones._

Les gueux ne sont jamais hors de leur chemin. _A beggar is never out of
his road._

Les hommes sont rares. _Men are rare._

Les honneurs changent les m”oe]urs. _Honours change manners._

Les honneurs comptent. _Much worship, much cost._

Les Italiens pleurent, les Allemands crient, et les Français chantent.
_The Italians cry, the Germans bawl, and the French sing._

Les jours se suivent et ne se ressemblent pas. _The days follow each
other and are not alike._

Les larrons s’entrebattent et les larcins se découvrent. _When thieves
fall out the thefts are discovered._

Les lois ont le nez de cire. _Laws have wax noses._

Les loups ne se mangent pas entre eux. _Wolves do not eat each other._

Les maisons des avocats sont faictes de la teste des folz. _Lawyers’
houses are built of fools’ heads._

Les mal vêtus devers le vent. _The worst clothed go to windward._

Les mariages sont écrits dans le ciel. _Marriages are written in
heaven._

Les mauvaises nouvelles ont des ailes. _Bad news has wings._

Les morts sont bientôt oubliés. _The dead are soon forgotten._

Les morveux veulent toujours moucher les autres. _Snivelling folks
always want to wipe other folks’ noses._

Les murs ont des oreilles. _Walls have ears._

Les oisons veulent mener les oies paître. _The goslings would lead the
geese out to grass._

Le soleil lui-même n’a-t-il pas des taches? _Are there not spots on the
sun?_

Le soleil luit pour tout le monde. _The sun shines for all the world._

Les petits cadeaux entretiennent l’amitié. _Little presents maintain
friendship._

Les petits ruisseaux font les grandes rivières. _Little brooks make
great rivers._

Les plus courtes folies sont les meilleures. _The shortest follies are
the best._

Les plus rusés sont les premiers pris. _The most cunning are the first
caught._

Les pots fêlés sont ceux qui durent le plus. _The flawed pot lasts
longest._

Les premiers vont devant. _First come first served._

Les princes ne veulent point de servitudes limitées. _Princes will not
be served on conditions._

Les princes se servent des hommes comme le laboureur des abeilles.
_Princes use men as the husbandman uses bees._

Les princes tiennent toujours leurs comptes, ils ne perdent jamais
rien. _Princes keep good reckoning, they never lose anything._

L’esprit qu’on veut avoir gâte celui qu’on a. _The wit one wants spoils
what one has._

Les raisonnements bannissent la raison. _Reasonings banish reason._

Les rois ont les mains longues. _Kings have long hands._

Les tonneaux vides sont ceux qui font le plus de bruit. _Empty casks
make the most noise._

Leurs chiens ne chassent point ensemble. _Their dogs don’t hunt in
couples._

Le ventre emporte la tête. _The belly overrules the head._

Lever à cinq, disner à neuf, souper à cinq, coucher à neuf, font vivre
d’ans nonante-neuf. _To rise at five, dine at nine, sup at five, go to
bed at nine, makes a man live to ninety-nine._

Lever à six, manger à dix, souper à six, coucher à dix, font vivre
l’homme dix fois dix. _To rise at six, eat at ten, sup at six, go to
bed at ten, makes a man live years ten times ten._

Le vilain ne sait ce qu’éperons valent. _The churl knows not the worth
of spurs._

Le vin donné aux ouvriers est le plus cher vendu. _The wine given to
your workmen is that for which you get the best paid._

Le vin ne porte point de chausses. _Wine wears no breeches._

Le vrai n’est pas toujours vraisemblable. _What is true is not always
probable._

L’habit ne fait pas le moine. _The gown does not make the monk._

L’homme est bien heureux qui a une belle femme auprès d’une abbaye.
_Happy is the man who has a handsome wife close to an abbey._

L’homme est de feu, la femme d’étoupe; le diable vient qui souffle.
_Man is fire, woman is tow, and the devil comes and blows._

L’homme n’a ni sens ni raison, qui jeune femme laisse au tison. _The
man has neither sense nor reason who leaves a young wife at home._

L’homme propose et Dieu dispose. _Man proposes and God disposes._

L’hôte et le poisson en trois jours sont poison. _A guest and a fish
after three days are poison._

L’ignorance des hommes fait bouillir le pot aux prêtres. _Men’s
ignorance makes the pot boil for priests._

L’intention est réputée pour le fait. _The will is taken for the deed._

L’occasion fait le larron. _Opportunity makes the thief._

L’”oe]il du maître engraisse le cheval. _The eye of the master fattens
the steed._

Loin des yeux loin du c”oe]ur. _Out of sight out of mind._

L’oiseau ne doit pas salir son nid. _The bird ought not to soil its own
nest._

Longue demeure fait changer ami. _Long absence changes friends._

Longue langue, courte main. _Long tongue, short hand._

Longues paroles font les jours courts. _Long talk makes short days._


M.

Maille à maille on fait le haubergeon. _Link by link the coat of mail
is made._

Maints sont bons parce qu’ils ne peuvent nuire. _Many a one is good
because he can do no mischief._

Maison faite et femme à faire. _A house ready made and a wife to make._

Mal d’autrui n’est que songe. _Another’s misfortune is only a dream._

Mal soupe qui tout dîne. _He sups ill who eats up all at dinner._

Mal sur mal n’est pas santé. _Misfortune upon misfortune is not
wholesome._

Marchand d’oignons se connaît en ciboules. _A dealer in onions is a
good judge of scallions._

Marchand qui perd ne peut rire. _The merchant that loses cannot laugh._

Mariage d’épervier: la femelle vaut mieux que le mâle. _A hawk’s
marriage: the hen is the better bird._

Marie ton fils quand tu voudras, ta fille quand tu pourras. _Marry your
son when you please, your daughter when you can._

Mari sourd et femme aveugle font toujours bon ménage. _A deaf husband
and a blind wife are always a happy couple._

Mauvais c”oe]ur et bon estomac. _A bad heart and a good stomach._

Mauvaise herbe croît toujours. _Ill weeds grow apace._

Mauvais ouvrier ne trouvera jamais bon outil. _A bad workman never
finds a good tool._

Méchant chien, court lien. _A wicked dog must be tied short._

Méchant poulain peut devenir bon cheval. _A ragged colt may make a good
horse._

Mère piteuse fait sa fille rogneuse. _A tender-hearted mother makes a
scabby daughter._

Mets ton manteau comme vient le vent. _Arrange your cloak as the wind
blows._

Mettre la charrue devant les b”oe]ufs. _To put the plough before the
oxen._

Mieux nourri qu’instruit. _Better fed than taught._

Mieux vaut assez que trop. _Enough is better than too much._

Mieux vaut avoir ami en voye qu’or ou argent en corroye. _Better to
have a friend on the road than gold or silver in your purse._

Mieux vaut bon repas que bel habit. _Better a good dinner than a fine
coat._

Mieux vaut couard que trop hardi. _Better be a coward than foolhardy._

Mieux vaut engin que force. _Contrivance is better than force._

Mieux vaut être tête de chien que queue de lion. _Better be the head of
a dog than the tail of a lion._

Mieux vaut faire envie que pitié. _Better be envied than pitied._

Mieux vaut glisser du pied que de la langue. _Better a slip of the foot
than of the tongue._

Mieux vaut marcher devant une poule que derrière un b”oe]uf. _Better
walk before a hen than behind an ox._

Mieux vaut perdre la laine que la brebis. _Better lose the wool than
the sheep._

Mieux vaut plein poing de bonne vie que ne faict sept muys de clergie.
_A handful of good life is better than seven bushels of learning._

Mieux vaut plier que rompre. _Better bend than break._

Mieux vaut règle que rente. _Thrift is better than an annuity._

Mieux vaut tard que jamais. _Better late than never._

Mieux vaut terre gâtée que terre perdue. _Better a ruined than a lost
land._

Mieux vaut une once de fortune qu’une livre de sagesse. _An ounce of
luck is worth a pound of wisdom._

Mieux vaut un pied que deux échasses. _One foot is better than two
stilts._

Mieux vaut un tiens que deux tu l’auras. _One “take this” is worth more
than two “you shall have.”_

Moineau en main vaut mieux que pigeon qui vole. _A sparrow in the hand
is better than a pigeon on the wing._

Moine qui demande pour Dieu demande pour deux. _The monk that begs for
God’s sake begs for two._

Moins vaut rage que courage. _Rage avails less than courage._

Moitié figue, moitié raisin. _Half figs, half raisins._

Montre-moi un menteur je te montrerai un larron. _Show me a liar and
I’ll show you a thief._

Montrer le soleil avec un flambeau. _To show the sun with a torch._

Morceau avalé n’a plus de goût. _There is no flavour in a swallowed
morsel._

Morte la bête, mort le venin. _The beast dead, the venom is dead._

Mot à mot on fait les gros livres. _Word by word the big books are
made._

Muraille blanche papier de fou. _A white wall is the fool’s paper._


N.

Nager entre deux eaux. _To swim between two waters._

Nage toujours et ne t’y fie. _Swim on and don’t trust._

N’a pas fait qui commence. _He has not done who is beginning._

Nécessité est mère d’invention. _Necessity is the mother of invention._

Nécessité n’a pas de loi. _Necessity has no law._

Ne crachez pas dans le puits, vous pouvez en boire l’eau. _Spit not in
the well, you may have to drink its water._

Ne croire à Dieu que sur bons gages. _Trust not to God but upon good
security._

Ne fais pas un four de ton bonnet ni de ton ventre un jardinet. _Don’t
make an oven of your cap or a garden of your belly._

Ne mets ton doigt en anneau trop étroit. _Don’t put your finger into
too tight a ring._

Ne meurs cheval, herbe te vient. _Horse, don’t die yet, grass is
coming._

Ne prêtez point votre argent à un grand seigneur. _Do not lend your
money to a great man._

Ne reprens ce que n’entens. _Don’t find fault with what you don’t
understand._

Ne sont pas tous chasseurs qui sonnent du cor. _All are not hunters who
blow the horn._

Ne touchez point à l’argent d’autrui, car le plus honnête homme n’y
ajouta jamais rien. _Touch not another man’s money, for the most honest
never added to it._

N’éveille pas le chat qui dort. _Wake not a sleeping cat._

Noblesse oblige. _Nobility imposes obligations._

Noire geline pond blanc ”oe]uf. _A black hen lays a white egg._

Nous verrons, dit l’aveugle. _We shall see, as the blind man said._

Nul feu sans fumée. _No fire without smoke._

Nul n’aura bon marché s’il ne le demande. _No one will get a bargain he
does not ask for._

Nul n’est prophète dans son pays. _No man is a prophet in his own
country._

Nul n’est si large que celui qui n’a rien à donner. _No one is so
liberal as he who has nothing to give._

Nul vent ne fait pour lui qui n’a point de port destiné. _No wind can
do him good who steers for no port._


O.

Oignez vilain il vous poindra, poignez vilain il vous oindra. _Anoint a
villain and he will prick you, prick a villain and he will anoint you._

Oiseau débonnaire de lui-même se fait. _The gentle hawk mans herself._

On a beau mener le b”oe]uf à l’eau s’il n’a soif. _It is in vain to
lead the ox to the water if he is not thirsty._

On achète tout fors le jour et la nuit. _Everything may be bought
except day and night._

On a plus de mal à se damner qu’à se sauver. _People take more pains to
be damned than to be saved._

On apprend en faillant. _One learns by failing._

On a souvent besoin de plus petit que soi. _One often has need of a
lesser than oneself._

On a tant crié Noël qu’à la fin il est venu. _Christmas has been talked
of so long that it has come at last._

On a toujours assez de force pour supporter le malheur de ses amis.
_One has always strength enough to bear the misfortunes of one’s
friends._

On compte les défauts de ceux qu’on attend. _People count up the faults
of those who keep them waiting._

On connaît l’ami au besoin. _A friend is known in time of need._

Oncques mâtin n’aima levrier. _Mastiff never liked greyhound._ (_A
churl never liked a gentleman._)

Oncques souhait n’emplit le sac. _Wishes never filled the bag._

Oncques vieil singe ne fit belle moue. _An old ape never made a pretty
grimace._

On dit est un sot. _”They say” is a fool._

On fait dire aux cloches tout ce qu’on veut. _People make the bells say
what they please._

On fait le loup plus grand qu’il n’est. _The wolf is not so big as
people make him._

On ferait un bien gros livre de tous les peut-être qui se disent en
un jour. _It would be a very big book that contained all the maybes
uttered in a day._

On frotte tant le fer qu’à la fin il s’échauffe. _Iron may be rubbed so
long that it gets heated._

On lie bien le sac avant qu’il soit plein. _A sack is best tied before
it is full._

On n’a jamais bon marché d’une mauvaise marchandise. _Bad ware is never
cheap._

On n’a jamais de marchandise que pour son argent. _One never gets more
than one’s money’s worth of anything._

On n’a jamais vu chèvre morte de faim. _No one ever saw a goat dead of
hunger._

On n’a rien pour rien. _Nothing is had for nothing._

On ne connaît point le vin aux cercles. _The wine is not known by the
hoops._

On ne doit pas à gras pourceau le cul oindre. _There’s no need to
grease the fat pig’s rump._

On ne doit pas laisser bonne terre pour mauvais seigneur. _Good land
should not be quitted for a bad landlord._

On ne fait pas de rien grasse porée. _Fat broth cannot be made of
nothing._

On ne jette des pierres qu’à l’arbre chargé de fruits. _It is only at
the tree loaded with fruit that people throw stones._

On ne peut contenter tout le monde et son père. _One cannot please
everybody and one’s father._

On ne peut faire qu’en faisant. _To do, one must be doing._

On ne peut pas empêcher le vent de venter. _One can’t hinder the wind
from blowing._

On ne peut pas être en même temps au four et au moulin. _One cannot
be at the oven and the mill at the same time._ (_One cannot be in two
places at once._)

On ne peut pas être et avoir été. _One cannot be and have been._

On ne peut sonner les cloches et aller à la procession. _One cannot
ring the bells and walk in the procession._

On ne prend pas le lièvre au son du tambour. _Hares are not caught by
the sound of the drum._

On ne prête qu’aux riches. _People lend only to the rich._

On ne sait pas pour qui on amasse. _One knows not for whom he gathers._

On ne saurait faire boire un âne s’il n’a pas soif. _You cannot make an
ass drink if he is not thirsty._

On ne saurait faire d’une buse un épervier. _You cannot make a hawk of
a buzzard._

On ne saurait tirer de l’huile d’un mur. _You cannot get oil out of a
wall._

On n’est jamais crotté que par la boue. _One is never soiled but by
filth._

On n’est jamais si riche que quand on déménage. _One is never so rich
as when one removes (from one house to another)._

On ne va jamais si loin que lorsqu’on ne sait pas où l’on va. _One
never goes so far as when one doesn’t know whither one is going._

On pêche bien en eau troublé. _It is good fishing in troubled waters._

On peut payer l’or trop cher. _One may buy gold too dear._

On prend plus de mouches avec du miel qu’avec du vinaigre. _Flies are
easier caught with honey than with vinegar._

On prend son bien où on le trouve. _A man takes his own wherever he
finds it._

On revient toujours à ses premières amours. _One always returns to
one’s first love._

On se heurte toujours où l’on a mal. _One always knocks oneself in the
sore place._

On se soûle bien de manger tartes. _One may tire of eating tarts._

On touche toujours sur le cheval qui tire. _The horse that draws most
is most whipped._

On trouve remède à tout fors à la mort. _There is a remedy for
everything but death._

On va bien loin depuis qu’on est las. _One may go a long way after one
is tired._

On voit plus de vieux ivrognes que de vieux médecins. _There are more
old drunkards than old doctors._

Or est qui or vaut. _That is gold which is worth gold._

Ote-toi de là que je m’y mette. _Get out of that place and let me take
it._

Où il est faible le fil se rompt. _Where the thread is weakest it
breaks._

Où il n’y a point de mal il ne faut point d’emplâtre. _Where there is
no sore there needs no plaister._

Où il n’y a rien le roi perd ses droits. _Where there is nothing the
king loses his rights._

Où la chèvre est attachée il faut qu’elle broute. _Where the goat is
tied she must browse._

Où la guêpe a passé le moucheron demeure. _Where the wasp has passed
the fly sticks fast._

Où la haie est plus basse on saute dessus. _Where the hedge is lowest
men jump over._

Où l’hôtesse est belle le vin est bon. _Where the hostess is handsome
the wine is good._

Oy, voy, et te tay, si veux vivre en paix. _Hear, see, and say nothing
if you would live in peace._


P.

Pain dérobé réveille l’appétit. _Stolen bread stirs the appetite._

Pain tant qu’il dure, vin à mesure. _Eat bread at pleasure, drink wine
by measure._

Parens sans amis, amis sans pouvoir, pouvoir sans vouloir, vouloir sans
effet, effet sans profit, profit sans vertu, ne vaut un fétu. _Kindred
without friends, friends without power, power without will, will
without effect, effect without profit, profit without virtue, is not
worth a rush._

Paris n’a pas été fait en un jour. _Paris was not built in a day._

Parole jetée va partout à la volée. _A word once out flies everywhere._

Partage de Montgomery: tout d’un côté, rien de l’autre. _A Montgomery
division: all on one side, nothing on the other._

Par trop débattre la vérité se perd. _In too much disputing truth is
lost._

Par trop presser l’anguille on la perd. _To squeeze an eel too hard is
the way to lose it._

Pas à pas on va bien loin. _Fair and softly goes far._

Passez-moi la rhubarbe je vous passerai le séné. _Give me the rhubarb
and you may take the senna._

Pauvreté est une espèce de ladrerie. _Poverty is a sort of leprosy._

Pauvreté n’est pas vice. _Poverty is not a vice._

Péché caché est à demi pardonné. _A sin concealed is half pardoned
(meaning when care is taken to conceal the scandal)._

Pendant que les chiens s’entre-grondent le loup dévore la brebis.
_Whilst the dogs are growling at each other the wolf devours the sheep._

Pense moult, parle peu, écris moins. _Think much, say little, write
less._

Petit à petit l’oiseau fait son nid. _Little by little the bird builds
its nest._

Petit chaudron, grandes oreilles. _Little pitchers have long ears._

Petit dîner longuement attendu, n’est pas donné, mais chèrement vendu.
_A little dinner, long expected and cold, is by no means given, but
dearly sold._

Petite brebiette toujours semble jeunette. _A little sheep always seems
young._

Petite chose aide souvent. _A little thing often helps._

Petite étincelle luit en ténèbres. _A little spark shines in the dark._

Petite pluie abat grand vent. _A little rain stills a great wind._

Petit homme abat grand chêne. _A little man fells a great oak._

Peu de levain aigrit grand’pâte. _A little leaven leavens a great mass._

Pierre qui roule n’amasse point de mousse. _A rolling stone gathers no
moss._

Plumer l’oie sans la faire crier. _To pluck the goose without making it
cry out._

Plus fait douceur que violence. _Gentleness does more than violence._

Plus le singe s’élève plus il montre son cul pelé. _The higher the ape
climbs the more he shows his rump._

Plus on est de fous, plus on rit. _The more fools the more laughter._

Plus on remue la merde et plus elle pue. _The more you stir it the more
it stinks._

Plus on se découvre, plus on a froid. _The more a man exposes his
nakedness the colder he is._

Plus on se hâte moins on avance. _The more haste the worse speed._

Point d’argent, point de Suisse. _No money no Swiss._

Point de nouvelles bonnes nouvelles. _No news is good news._

Point de roses sans épines. _No rose without a thorn._

Porte fermée, le diable s’en va. _When the devil finds the door shut he
goes away._

Porter de l’eau à la rivière. _To carry water to the river._

Porter lanterne à midi. _To carry a lantern in mid-day._

Possession vaut titre. _Possession is as good as a title._

Pour bien connaître un homme il faut avoir mangé un boisseau de sel
avec lui. _To know a man well one must have eaten a bushel of salt with
him._

Pour de l’argent les chiens dansent. _Money makes dogs dance._

Pour faire un bon ménage, il faut que l’homme soit sourd et la femme
aveugle. _To make a happy couple, the husband must be deaf and the wife
blind._

Pour l’amour du chevalier baise la dame l’écuyer. _For sake of the
knight the lady kisses the squire._

Pour néant demande conseil qui ne le veut croire. _He asks advice in
vain who will not follow it._

Pour un moine l’abbaye ne faut point. _The abbey does not fail for want
of one monk._

Pour un plaisir mille douleurs. _For one pleasure a thousand pains._

Prendre l’occasion aux cheveux. _To take opportunity by the forelock._

Prends le premier conseil d’une femme et non le second. _Take a woman’s
first advice and not her second._

Près de l’église et loin de Dieu. _The nearer the church the farther
from God._

Près du moustier à messe le dernier. _The nearer the minster the later
to mass._

Promettre et tenir sont deux. _Promising and performing are two things._

Promettre plus de beurre que de pain. _To promise more butter than
bread._

Puisque le vin est tiré il faut le boire. _Since the wine is drawn it
must be drunk._


Q.

Quand Dieu envoie la farine le diable enlève le sac. _When God sends
flour the devil carries off the sack._

Quand il n’y a point de vent chacun sait naviguer. _When there is no
wind every man is a pilot._

Quand la cage est faite l’oiseau s’envole. _When the cage is ready the
bird is flown._

Quand la fille est mariée il arrive assez de gendres. _After the
daughter is married, then come sons-in-law in plenty._

Quand la porte est basse il faut se baisser. _When the door is low one
must stoop._

Quand l’arbre est tombé tout le monde court aux branches. _When the
tree is down everybody runs to the branches._

Quand l’aveugle porte la bannière, mal pour ceux qui marchent derrière.
_When the blind man carries the banner, woe to those who follow._

Quand le chien se noye chacun lui porte de l’eau. _When the dog is
drowning every one brings him water._

Quand le diable devient vieux il se fait ermite. _When the devil grows
old he turns hermit._

Quand le diable dit ses patenôtres il veut te tromper. _When the devil
says his paternosters he means to cheat you._

Quand le Français dort le diable le berce. _When the Frenchman sleeps
the devil rocks him._

Quand les biens viennent les corps faillent. _When goods increase the
body decreases._

Quand les paroles sont dites l’eau bénite est faite. _When the words
are said, the holy water is made._

Quand on a des filles on est toujours berger. _He who has daughters is
always a shepherd._

Quand on est bien il faut s’y tenir. _When you are well off keep as you
are._

Quand on est mort, c’est pour longtemps. _When one is dead, it is for a
long while._

Quand on n’a pas ce que l’on aime, il faut aimer ce que l’on a. _When
one has not what one likes, one must like what one has._

Quand on parle du loup, on en voit la queue. _Talk of the wolf and you
see his tail._

Quand tous péchés sont vieux l’avarice est encore jeune. _When all
other sins are old avarice is still young._

Quand vient la gloire s’en va la mémoire. _When glory comes memory
departs._

Que ta chemise ne sache ta guise. _Let not your shirt know your way of
thinking._

Qui a bonne tête ne manque pas de chapeaux. _A good head does not want
for hats._

Qui a bu boira. _He who has drunk will drink._

Qui a compagnon a maître. _He who has a companion has a master._

Qui a de l’argent a des pirouettes. _He who has money has capers._

Qui a froid souffle le feu. _Let him who is cold blow the fire._

Qui a honte de manger a honte de vivre. _He that is ashamed to eat is
ashamed to live._

Qui aime Bertrand aime son chien. _Love Bertrand love his dog._

Qui aime bien châtie bien. _Who loves well chastises well._

Qui aime bien tard oublie. _Who loves well is slow to forget._

Qui a la bourse pleine prêche au pauvre. _He who has his purse full
preaches to the poor man._

Qui a tête de cire ne doit pas s’approcher du feu. _He that hath a head
of wax must not approach the fire._

Qui attend les souliers d’un mort risque d’aller pieds nus. _He who
waits for a dead man’s shoes is in danger of going barefoot._

Qui cache peut trouver. _He that hides can find._

Qui casse les verres les paye. _He pays for the glasses who breaks
them._

Qui cesse d’être ami ne l’a jamais été. _He never was a friend who has
ceased to be one._

Qui chapon mange chapon lui vient. _Who eats capon, capon comes to
him._

Qui choisit, prend le pire. _He who chooses takes the worst._ (_Pick
and choose, and take the worst._)

Qui commence et ne parfait, sa peine perd. _He who begins and does not
finish loses his labour._

Qui compte sans son hôte, compte deux fois. _He that reckons without
his host must reckon again._

Qui court deux lièvres, n’en prendra aucun. _He that hunts two hares
will catch neither._

Qui crache contre le ciel, il lui tombe sur la tête. _Who spits against
heaven, it falls on his head._

Qui craint de souffrir, souffre de crainte. _He who fears to suffer,
suffers from fear._

Qui cuir voit tailler, courroye en demande. _He who sees leather cut
asks for a thong._

Qui dit averti, dit muni. _Forewarned, forearmed._

Qui donner peut, il a maint bon voisin. _He who can give has many a
good neighbour._

Qui doute ne se trompe point. _Who doubts errs not._

Qui écoute aux portes, entend plus qu’il ne désire. _He who listens at
doors hears more than he desires._

Qui en dit du mal, veut l’acheter. _He who dispraises a thing, wants to
buy it._

Qui épargne, gagne. _Saving is getting._

Qui épargne le vice, fait tort à la vertu. _He who spares vice wrongs
virtue._

Qui est avec les loups, il lui faut hurler. _He who kennels with wolves
must howl._

Qui est bien, qu’il s’y tienne. _Whose is well let him keep so._

Qui est sur la mer, il ne fait pas des vents ce qu’il veut. _He who is
at sea does not direct the winds._

Qui femme a, noise a. _He that hath a wife is sure of strife._

Qui femme croit et âne mène, son corps ne sera jamais sans peine. _He
who trusts a woman and leads an ass will never be free from plague._

Qui gagne, joue bien. _He plays well that wins._

Qui juge entre deux amis, perdra l’un ou l’autre. _He who judges
between two friends loses one of them._

Qui mal cherche, mal trouve. _Harm watch harm catch._

Qui mange de l’oye du roi, chiera une plume quarante ans après. _He
who eats of the king’s goose will void a feather forty years after._

Qui mange la vache du roi maigre, la paie grasse. _He who eats the
king’s cow lean, pays for it fat._

Qui menace, a peur. _He who threatens is afraid._

Qui monte la mule, la ferre. _He who rides the mule shoes her._

Qui mouche trop son nez, en tire du sang. _Who blows his nose too hard
makes it bleed._

Qui naît le dimanche, jamais ne meurt de peste. _A Sunday’s child never
dies of the plague._

Qui n’amorce pas son haim, pèche en vain. _He who does not bait his
hook fishes in vain._

Qui n’a, ne peut. _Who has not, cannot._

Qui n’a pas argent en bourse, ait miel en bouche. _He that has not
money in his purse should have honey in his mouth._

Qui naquit chat, court après les souris. _Who is born of a cat will run
after mice._ (_An allusion to one of Æsop’s fables._)

Qui n’a qu’un ”oe]il, bien le garde. _A man who has but one eye must
take good care of it._

Qui n’a rien, ne craint rien. _He who has nothing fears nothing._

Qui n’a santé, n’a rien. _He who has not health has nothing._

Qui ne châtie culot, ne châtie culasse. _He that corrects not youth
controls not age._

Qui ne dit mot, consent. _Silence gives consent._

Qui ne fait pas quand il peut, il ne fait pas quand il veut. _He that
will not when he may, when he will shall have nay._

Qui ne fait rien, fait mal. _He who does nothing does ill._

Qui ne gagne, perd. _He who does not gain loses._

Qui ne hasarde rien, n’a rien. _Nothing venture, nothing have._

Qui n’entend qu’une cloche, n’entend qu’un son. _Who hears but one bell
hears but one sound._

Qui ne parle, n’erre. _He who holds his tongue does not commit himself._

Qui ne peut faire son salut par c”oe]ur, ne le fera par livre. _Who
cannot work out his salvation by heart will not do it by book._

Qui ne peut mordre, ne doit pas montrer les dents. _Don’t show your
teeth if you can’t bite._

Qui ne regarde pas en avant, se trouve en arrière. _He who looks not
before finds himself behind._

Qui ne retire de sa vache que la queue, ne perd pas tout. _He who
recovers but the tail of his cow does not lose all._

Qui ne sait bien parler de son métier, il ne le sait pas. _He who
cannot speak well of his trade does not understand it._

Qui ne s’aventure, n’a ni cheval ni mule; et qui trop s’aventure, perd
cheval et mule. _Who does not venture gets neither horse nor mule, and
who ventures too much loses horse and mule._

Qui ne se lasse pas, lasse l’adversité. _He who does not tire, tires
adversity._

Qui ne sort que de jour, n’a que faire de lanterne. _He who goes abroad
by day has no need of a lantern._

Qui ne souffre pas seul, ne souffre pas tant. _Company in distress
makes trouble less._

Qui ne veut parler, ne veut gagner. _Spare to speak and spare to speed._

Qui n’y va, n’y chet. _He that ventures not fails not._

Qui parle, sème; qui écoute, recueille. _Who speaks, sows; who listens,
reaps._

Qui partout va, partout prend. _He who goes everywhere gains
everywhere._

Qui passe un jour d’hiver, il passe un de ses ennemis mortels. _He who
passes a winter’s day passes one of his mortal enemies._

Qui paye, a bien le droit de donner son avis. _He who pays is fairly
entitled to speak his mind._

Qui paye bien, est bien servi. _He who pays well is well served._

Qui paye tôt, emprunte quand il veut. _Who pays soon borrows when he
will._

Qui perd, pèche. _He who loses sins._

Qui peut lécher, peut mordre. _He who can lick can bite._

Qui plus qu’il n’a vaillant dépend, il fait la corde à quoi se pend.
_He that spends more than he is worth spins a rope for his own neck._

Qui plus sait, plus se tait. _Who knows most says least._

Qui porte un fardeau, en portera bientôt cent. _He who carries one
burden will soon carry a hundred._

Qui pourrait vivre sans espoir? _Who could live without hope?_

Qui prend femme, prend maître. _He who takes a wife takes a master._

Qui prend une femme pour sa dot, à la liberté tourne le dos. _Who wives
for a dower, resigns his own power._

Qui prête à l’ami, perd au double. _Who lends to a friend loses doubly._

Qui prouve trop, ne prouve rien. _Who proves too much proves nothing._

Qui quitte sa place, la perd. _He who quits his place loses it._

Qui refuse, muse. _Who refuses, muses._

Qui répond, paye. _Who answers for another pays._

Qui reste dans la vallée ne passera jamais la montagne. _He that stays
in the valley will not get over the hill._

Qui rien ne porte, rien ne lui chet. _He who carries nothing loses
nothing._

Qui s’acquitte, s’enrichit. _He who gets out of debt enriches himself._

Qui s’arrête à chaque pierre, n’arrive jamais. _He who stops at every
stone never gets to his journey’s end._

Qui s’attend à l’écuelle d’autrui, dîne souvent par c”oe]ur. _He who
waits for another man’s trencher often dines in imagination (or with
Duke Humphrey)._

Qui saurait les aventures, ne serait jamais pauvre. _Could a man
foresee events he would never be poor._

Qui se couche avec des chiens, se lève avec des puces. _He who lies
down with dogs gets up with fleas._

Qui se détourne, évite le danger. _He who turns aside avoids danger._

Qui se fâche, a tort. _He who loses his temper is in the wrong._

Qui se fait brebis, le loup le mange. _Make yourself a sheep and the
wolf will eat you._

Qui se marie à la hâte, se repent à loisir. _Marry in haste and repent
at leisure._

Qui se marie par amours, a bonnes nuits et mauvais jours. _He who
marries for love has good nights and bad days._

Qui sème des chardons, recueille des épines. _He who sows thistles
reaps thorns._

Qui sème épines, n’aille déchaux. _Who sows thorns should not go
barefoot._

Qui sème, recueille. _Who sows reaps._

Qui se remue, Dieu l’adjue. _God helps him who helps himself._

Qui se ressemble s’assemble. _Like will to like._

Qui sert commun, nul ne le paye, et s’il défaut, chacun l’abbaye. _Who
serves the mass is thanked by none, but cursed if aught be left undone._

Qui se sent galeux, se gratte. _Let him that itches scratch himself._

Qui se sent morveux, se mouche. _Let him who feels he has a dirty nose
wipe it._

Qui se tient à Paris, ne sera jamais pape. _He who never budges from
Paris will never be pope._

Qui s’excuse, s’accuse. _He who excuses himself accuses himself._

Qui s’y frotte, s’y pique. _No jesting with edged tools._

Qui terre a, guerre a. _Whoso hath land hath war._

Qui tient la poële par la queue, il la tourne là où il veut. _He who
holds the handle of the frying-pan turns it as he pleases._

Qui tient le fil, tient le peloton. _He who holds the thread holds the
ball._

Qui tôt donne, deux fois donne. _He gives twice who gives in a trice._

Qui tourmente les autres, ne dort pas bien. _He who torments others
does not sleep well._

Qui trébuche et ne tombe pas, avance son chemin. _He that stumbles and
falls not, mends his pace._

Qui trop change, empire. _Who often changes, damages._

Qui trop embrasse, mal étreint. _He who grasps too much holds not
firmly._

Qui trop se hâte en cheminant, en beau chemin se fourvoye souvent. _He
that is too much in haste, may stumble on a good road._

Qui un punit, cent menace. _Who punishes one threatens a hundred._

Qui va chercher de la laine, revient tondu. _He who goes to collect
wool may come back shorn._

Qui va et retourne, fait bon voyage. _Who goes and returns makes a good
journey._

Qui va, il lèche; qui repose, il sèche. _He who bestirs himself sucks
up, he who lies still dries up._

Qui veut apprendre à prier, aille souvent sur la mer. _If a man would
learn to pray let him go often to sea._

Qui veut être riche en un an, au bout de six mois est pendu. _He who
wants to be rich in a year is hanged at six months’ end._

Qui veut faire une porte d’or, il y met tous les jours un clou. _He who
wishes to make a golden door drives a nail into it every day._

Qui veut noyer son chien, l’accuse de rage. _A man who wants to drown
his dog says he is mad._

Qui veut plaire à tout le monde, doit se lever de bonne heure. _He had
need rise early who would please everybody._

Qui veut prendre un oiseau, qu’il ne l’effarouche. _To scare a bird is
not the way to catch it._

Qui veut tenir nette maison, il n’y faut prêtre ni pigeon. _He that
would keep his house clean must not let priest or pigeon into it._

Qui veut vivre à Rome, ne doit pas se quereller avec le pape. _He who
wishes to live at Rome must not quarrel with the pope._

Qui veut voyager loin, ménage sa monture. _He who wants to travel far
takes care of his beast._

Qui vient, est beau; qui apporte, est encore plus beau. _Fair is he
that comes, but fairer he that brings._

Qui vit à compte, vit à honte. _Who lives on the score has shame
evermore._

Qui vit longtemps, sait ce qu’est douleur. _He who lives long knows
what pain is._

Qui vivra, verra. _Who lives will see._

Qui voit une épingle et ne la prend, vient un temps qu’il s’en repent.
_See a pin and let it lie, you’ll want a pin before you die._

Quoique fol tarde, jour ne tarde. _Though the fool waits, the day does
not._


R.

Raison contre le fort est un trepiteux port. _Reason not with the
great, ’tis a perilous gate._

Renard qui dort la matinée, n’a pas la langue emplumée. _The fox that
sleeps in the morning has not his tongue feathered._

Rendre à quelqu’un la monnaie de sa pièce. _To give change out for his
coin._

Rendre pois pour fève. _To give a pea for a bean._ (_A Rowland for an
Oliver._)

Ressembler aux bahutiers, qui font plus de bruit que de besogne. _Like
box-makers, more noise than work._

Rien n’a qui assez n’a. _He has nothing who has not enough._

Rien n’arrive pour rien. _Nothing happens for nothing._

Rien ne pèse tant qu’un secret. _Nothing is so burthensome as a secret._

Rien ne ressemble plus à un honnête homme qu’un fripon. _Nothing is
more like an honest man than a rogue._

Rien ne se donne si libéralement que les conseils. _Nothing is so
liberally given as advice._

Rien n’est bon comme le fruit défendu. _Nothing so good as forbidden
fruit._

Rien ne vaut poulain s’il ne rompt son lien. _A colt is good for
nothing if it does not break its halter._

Rien ne vieillit plus vite qu’un bienfait. _Nothing grows old sooner
than a kindness._

Rira bien qui rira le dernier. _He’ll laugh well that laughs longest._

Rome n’a pas été faite en un jour. _Rome was not built in a day._


S.

Saint ne peut, si Dieu ne veut. _Saint cannot if God will not._

Saint qui ne guérit de rien, n’a guère de pélerins. _The saint who
works no cures has few pilgrims to his shrine._

Sans pain, sans vin, amour n’est rien. _Without bread and wine even
love will pine._

Sauter de la poële sur la braise. _To jump out of the frying pan into
the fire._

Secret de deux, secret de Dieu; secret de trois, secret de tous. _The
secret of two is God’s secret, the secret of three is everybody’s
secret._

Se faire d’évêque meunier. _From bishop to turn miller._

Se faire marchand de poissons la veille de Pâques. _To turn fishmonger
on Easter-eve._

Se jeter dans l’eau de peur de la pluie. _To jump into the water for
fear of the rain._

Selon le bras la saignée. _According to the arm be the bleeding._

Selon le saint l’encens. _Like saint like incense._

Selon le vent la voile. _As the wind so the sail._ (_Set your sail to
the wind._)

Sers comme serf, ou fuy comme cerf. _Serve as a serf or fly like a
deer._

Service de grands n’est pas héritage. _Service is no inheritance._

Si ce n’était le si et mais, nous serions tous riches à jamais. _Were
it not for “if” and “but,” we should all be rich for ever._

Si c’était un loup, il vous sauterait au cou. _Were it a wolf it would
spring at your throat._

Si enfer n’est plein, jamais n’y aura d’avocat sauvé. _Unless hell is
full no lawyer will ever be saved._

Signer pour les deux parties. _To sign for both parties._

Si jeunesse savait! si vieillesse pouvait! _If youth knew! if age
could!_

Si le ciel tombait il y aurait bien des alouettes prises. _If the sky
were to fall we should catch plenty of larks._

Si le diable sortait de l’enfer pour combattre, il se présenterait
aussitôt un Français pour accepter le défi. _Were the devil to come
from hell to fight, there would forthwith be a Frenchman to accept the
challenge._

S’il est vrai, il peut être. _’Tis possible if true._

S’il fait beau, prends ton manteau; s’il pleut, prends-le si tu veux.
_If the weather is fine, put on your cloak; if it rains, do as you
please._

S’il ne tient qu’à jurer, la vache est à nous. _If it only depends on
swearing, the cow is ours._

Si nous payons la musique, nous voulons aussi danser. _If we pay for
the music we will join in the dance._

Si souhaits fussent vrais, pastoureaux rois seraient. _If wishes were
true, shepherds would be kings._ (_If wishes would bide, beggars would
ride._)

Si tu as la tête de beurre, ne te fais pas boulanger. _If your head is
made of butter, don’t be a baker._

Si tu ne le peux dire, si le monstre au doigt. _If you cannot say it,
point to it with your finger._

Si vous lui donnez un pied, il vous en prendra quatre. _Give him a foot
and he’ll take four._

Six choses au monde n’ont mestier: prestre hardy, coüard chevalier,
juge convoiteux, puant barbier, mère piteuse, rogneux boulengier. _Six
things have no business in the world: a fighting priest, a coward
knight, a covetous judge, a stinking barber, a soft-hearted mother, and
an itchy baker._

Sois vraiment ce que tu veux qu’on te croie. _Be truly what thou
wouldst be thought to be._

Soleil qui luisarne au matin, femme qui parle latin, enfant nourri de
vin, ne viennent point à bonne fin. _A glaring sunny morning, a woman
that talks Latin, and a child reared on wine, never come to a good end._

Son cheval a la tête trop grosse, il ne peut sortir de l’écurie. _His
horse’s head is too big, it cannot get out of the stable._

Songes sont mensonges. _Dreams are lies._

Soubs ombre d’asne entre chien en moulin. _The dog gets into the mill
under cover of the ass._

Souffler le chaud et le froid. _To blow hot and cold._

Soupçon est d’amitié poison. _Suspicion is the poison of friendship._

Souris qui n’a qu’un trou est bientôt prise. _The mouse that has but
one hole is soon caught._

Souvent les railleurs sont raillés. _The biter is often bit._

Suivez la rivière et vous gagnerez la mer. _Follow the river and you
will reach the sea._

Surement va qui n’a rien. _He goes safely who has nothing._

Sur un ”oe]uf pond la poule un ”oe]uf. _Upon an egg the hen lays an
egg._


T.

Tant doit-on le chien blandir qu’on ait la voie passée. _One must talk
soothingly to the dog until one has passed him._

Tant va la cruche à l’eau qu’à la fin elle se brise. _The pitcher goes
often to the well and gets broken at last._

Tant vaut l’homme, tant vaut sa terre. _As the man is worth his land is
worth._

Tard donner, c’est refuser. _To give tardily is to refuse._

Tel a beaux yeux qui n’y voit goutte. _Some have fine eyes and can’t
see a jot._

Tel a du pain qui n’a plus de dents. _Some have bread who have no teeth
left._

Tel croit se chauffer qui se brûle. _Some who mean only to warm, burn
themselves._

Tel cuide avoir fait qui commence. _Some think they have done when they
are only beginning._

Tel cuide venger sa honte qui l’accroît. _Some thinking to avenge their
shame increase it._

Tel en pâtit qui n’en peut mais. _Many a one suffers for what he can’t
help._

Tel maître, tel valet. _Like master, like man._

Tel menace, qui a peur. _A man may threaten yet be afraid._

Tel menace, qui est battu. _The threatener sometimes gets a beating._

Tel qui rit vendredi, dimanche pleurera. _He that laughs on Friday may
cry on Sunday._

Tel vend, qui ne livre pas. _Some sell and don’t deliver._

Temps, vent, femme, et fortune, changent comme la lune. _Weather, wind,
women, and fortune change like the moon._

Tendresse maternelle toujours se renouvelle. _Mother’s love is ever in
its spring._

Tenir le loup par les oreilles. _To hold the wolf by the ears._

Tête de fou ne blanchit jamais. _A fool’s head never whitens._

Tirer le diable par la queue, ne mène loin jeunes ni vieux. _Pulling
the devil by the tail does not lead far young or old._

Tirer les marrons du feu avec la patte du chat. _To take the chesnuts
out of the fire with the cat’s paw._

Tôt gagné, tôt gaspillé. _Soon gained soon squandered._

Toujours amoureux, jamais marié. _Always in love, never married._

Toujours ne frappe-t-on pas ce à quoy l’on vise. _One does not always
hit what one aims at._

Toujours pêche qui en prend un. _He fishes on who catches one._

Toujours truye songe bran. _A sow is always dreaming of bran._

Tout bec crochu de proye est soustenu. _Every hooked beak is maintained
by prey._

Tout bois n’est pas bon à faire flèche. _Not every sort of wood is fit
to make an arrow._

Tout ce qui branle ne tombe pas. _Every thing does not fall that
totters._

Tout ce qui reluit n’est pas or. _All is not gold that glitters._

Tout chemin mène à Rome. _Every road leads to Rome._

Toute chair n’est pas venaison. _All flesh is not venison._

Toute chose qui est bonne à prendre est bonne à rendre. _What is worth
receiving is worth returning._

Toute comparaison est odieuse. _Comparisons are odious._

Toute eau éteint feu. _Any water puts out fire._

Toutes les clefs ne pendent pas à une ceinture. _All the keys don’t
hang at one girdle._

Toutes têtes ne sont pas coffres à raison. _All heads are not
sense-boxes._

Toutes vérités ne sont pas bonnes à dire. _All truths are not good to
be uttered._

Tout état, et rien au plat. _All state, and nothing on the plate._

Tout fait ventre, pourvu qu’il entre. _A bellyful is a bellyful._

Tout le monde est sage après l’événement. _Everybody is wise after the
thing has happened._

Tout paraît jaune à qui a la jaunisse. _To the jaundiced all things
seem yellow._

Tout passe, tout casse, tout lasse. _Everything passes, everything
breaks, everything wearies._

Tout va à qui n’a pas besoin. _Everything goes to him who does not want
it._

Tout vient à point à qui sait attendre. _Everything in time comes to
him, who knows how to wait._

Tout y va par compère et commère. _Everything goes by favour and
cousinship._

Tricherie revient à son maître. _Trickery comes back to its master._

Triste est la maison où le coq se tait et la poule chante. _It is a
sorry house in which the cock is silent and the hen crows._

Trois déménagements valent un incendie. _Three removals are as bad as a
fire._

Trois frères, trois châteaux. _Three brothers, three castles._

Trop achète le miel qui le lèche sur les épines. _He pays dear for
honey who licks it off thorns._

Trop de zèle gâte tout. _Too much zeal spoils all._

Trop gratter cuit, trop parler nuit. _Too much scratching smarts, too
much talking harms._

Trop tard crie l’oiseau quand il est pris. _It is too late for the bird
to scream when it is caught._

Trop tranchant ne coupe pas, trop pointu ne perce pas. _Too keen an
edge does not cut, too fine a point does not pierce._

Truie aime mieux bran que roses. _A sow prefers bran to roses._

Tuer la poule pour avoir l’”oe]uf. _To kill the hen by way of getting
the egg._

Tuer un mercier pour un peigne. _To kill a mercer for a comb._


U.

Un ami de table et de vin, tenir ne faut pour bon voisin. _A friend to
my table and wine, is no good neighbour._

Un âne ne trébuche pas deux fois sur la même pierre. _An ass does not
stumble twice over the same stone._

Un apothicaire ne doit être longtemps cocu. _An apothecary ought not to
be long a cuckold._

Un aveugle mène l’autre en la fosse. _One blind man leads another into
the ditch._

Un barbier en rase un autre. _One barber shaves another._

Un bienfait reproché tint toujours lieu d’offense. _Upbraiding makes a
benefit an injury._

Un boiteux ne veut aller avec un plus boiteux que lui. _A lame man
won’t walk with one who is lamer._

Un bon avis vaut un ”oe]il dans la main. _A good advice is as good as
an eye in the hand._

Un bon bailleur en fait bailler deux. _A good gaper makes two gapers._

Un bon renard ne mange pas les poules de son voisin. _A good fox does
not eat his neighbour’s fowls._

Un bon repas doit commencer par la faim. _A good repast ought to begin
with hunger._

Un brochet fait plus qu’une lettre de recommandation. _A jackfish does
more than a letter of recommendation._

Un cerveau ne vaut guère sans langue. _A brain is worth little without
a tongue._

Un chien regarde bien un évêque. _A dog may look at a bishop._

Un clou chasse l’autre. _One nail drives out another._

Un coup de langue est pire qu’un coup de lance. _The tongue wounds more
than a lance._

Un courtisan doit être sans humeur et sans honneur. _A courtier should
be without feeling and without honour._

Une chandelle à Saint Michel et une à son diable. _One candle for St.
Michael, and another for his devil._

Une conscience pure est un bon oreiller. _A clear conscience is a good
pillow._

Une faute niée est deux fois commise. _A fault denied is twice
committed._

Une femme ne cèle que ce qu’elle ne sait pas. _A woman conceals only
what she does not know._

Une fleur ne fait pas une guirlande. _One flower does not make a
garland._

Une fois n’est pas coutume. _Once is no custom._

Une hirondelle ne fait pas le printemps. _One swallow does not make a
spring._

Une once de faveur vaut mieux qu’une livre de justice. _An ounce of
favour goes further, or is worth more, than a pound of justice._

Une poule aveugle peut quelquefois trouver son grain. _A blind hen can
sometimes find her corn._

Une science requiert tout son homme. _An art requires a whole man._

Une tromperie en attire une autre. _One deceit brings on another._

Un fou avise bien un sage. _A wise man may learn of a fool._

Un fou fait toujours commencement. _A fool is always beginning._

Un homme averti en vaut deux. _A man warned is as good as two._

Un homme bien monté est toujours orgueilleux. _A man well mounted is
always proud._

Un homme de paille vaut une femme d’or. _A man of straw is worth a
woman of gold._

Un homme mort n’a ni parents ni amis. _A dead man has neither relations
nor friends._

Un homme, nul homme. _One man, no man._

Un homme qui se noie s’attache à un brin d’herbe. _A drowning man
clings to a blade of grass._

Un homme riche n’est jamais laid pour une fille. _A rich man is never
ugly in the eyes of a girl._

Un jour en vaut deux pour qui fait chaque chose en son lieu. _One day
is as good as two for him who does everything in its place._

Un malheur ne vient jamais seul. _Misfortunes never come single._

Un marteau d’argent rompt une porte de fer. _A silver hammer breaks an
iron door._

Un mauvais accommodement vaut mieux qu’un bon procès. _A bad compromise
is better than a good lawsuit._

Un moineau dans la main vaut mieux qu’une grue qui vole. _A sparrow in
the hand is better than a crane on the wing._

Un noble prince ou roy n’a jamais pille ne croix. _A noble prince or
king never has a coin to bless himself._

Un petit homme projette parfois une grande ombre. _A little man
sometimes casts a long shadow._

Un peu d’absence fait grand bien. _A little absence does much good._

Un peu d’aide fait grand bien. _A little help does a great deal._

Un peu de fiel gâte beaucoup de miel. _A little gall spoils a great
deal of honey._

Un seigneur de paille mange un vassal d’acier. _A lord of straw devours
a vassal of steel._

Un seul homme ne peut suffire à tout. _No living man all things can._

Un sot trouve toujours un plus sot qui l’admire. _One fool always finds
a greater fool to admire him._

Un tiens vaut mieux que deux tu l’auras. _One take-this is better than
two thou-shalt-haves._

Un ver se recoquille quand on marche dessus. _Tread on a worm and it
will turn._

Un vieux four est plus aisé à chauffer qu’un neuf. _An old oven is
easier to heat than a new one._


V.

Vache de loin a lait assez. _A cow from afar gives plenty of milk._

Vache ne sait ce que vaut sa queue jusqu’à ce qu’elle l’ait perdue. _A
cow does not know what her tail is worth until she has lost it._

Valet devant, maître derrière, en pont, en planche, en rivière. _At a
bridge, a plank, a river, the servant foremost, the master behind._

Vent au visage rend un homme sage. _Adversity makes a man wise._

Ventre affamé n’a point d’oreilles. _A hungry belly has no ears._

Ventre plein conseille bien. _A full belly counsels well._

Veux-tu meilleur pain que de froment? _Do you want better bread than
wheaten?_

Viande d’ami est bientôt prête. _A friend’s meat is soon ready._

Vides chambres font femmes folles. _Empty rooms make giddy housewives._

Vie de pourceau, courte et bonne. _A pig’s life, short and sweet._

Vieilles amours et vieux tisons s’allument en toutes saisons. _Old love
and old brands kindle at all seasons._

Vieux amis et comptes nouveaux. _Old friends and new reckonings._

Vieux b”oe]uf fait sillon droit. _An old ox makes a straight furrow._

Vieux chien n’aboie pas en vain. _An old dog does not bark for
nothing._

Vilain affamé, demi enragé. _A hungry clown is half mad._

Vilain enrichi ne connaît parent ni ami. _A clown enriched knows
neither relation nor friend._

Vilain ne sçait qu’esperon vaut. _A churl knows not the worth of spurs_
(i. e. _honour_).

Ville qui parlemente est moitié rendue. _The town that parleys is half
surrendered._

Vin versé n’est pas avalé. _Wine poured out is not wine swallowed._

Vivre au jour la journée. _To live from hand to mouth._

Voix du peuple, voix de Dieu. _The people’s voice, God’s voice._

Voler un voleur n’est pas voler. _To rob a robber is not robbing._

Vouloir, c’est pouvoir. _Will is power._

Vraie noblesse nul ne blesse. _True nobility is invulnerable._




ITALIAN PROVERBS.


A.

Abbiamo pur fiorini che troveremo cugini. _Let us have florins and we
shall find cousins._

Abbi piuttosto il piccolo per amico, che il grande per nemico. _Rather
have a little one for your friend, than a great one for your enemy._

Abbondanza genera fastidio. _Plenty makes daintiness._

A bisogni si conoscon gli amici. _Friends are known in time of need._
(_Friends in need are friends indeed._)

A buona derrata pensaci su. _At a good bargain pause and ponder._

A buon cavaliere non manca lancia. _A good cavalier never lacks a
lance._

A buon cavallo non manca sella. _A good horse never lacks a saddle._

A buon cavallo non occorre dirgli trotta. _No need to say “trot” to a
good horse._

A buon intenditor poche parole. _A word to the wise is enough._

A buon vino non bisogna frasca. _Good wine needs no bush._

A cader va chi troppo in alto sale. _He who climbs too high is near a
fall._

A can che fugge, dagli, dagli. _When a dog runs away, hit him! hit him!_

A can che lecchi cenere, non gli fidar farina. _The dog that licks
ashes is not to be trusted with flour._

A cane scottato l’acqua fredda pare calda. _A scalded dog thinks cold
water hot._

A cattiva vacca Dio dà corte corna. _God gives a curst cow short horns._

A cattivo cane corto legame. _A mischievous dog must be tied short._

A causa perduta, parole assai. _Plenty of words when the cause is lost._

A caval donato, non guardar in bocca. _Look not a gift horse in the
mouth._

A caval donato, non si mira il pelo. _Never heed the colour of a gift
horse._

A cavalli tristi o buoni, sempre porta i tuoi sproni. _Be the horse
good or bad always wear your spurs._

A caval magro vanno le mosche. _Flies flock to the lean horse._

A cavar di casa un morto, ci voglion quattro vivi. _It takes four
living men to carry one dead man out of a house._

Accasca in un punto quel che non accasca in cento anni. _That happens
in a moment which may not happen in a hundred years._

Accenna al savio e lascia far a lui. _Give the wise man a hint and
leave him to act._

Accordatevi, dice Arlotto, ed io farò piovere. _Agree between
yourselves (as to the time), quoth Arlotto, and I will make it rain._

Accosta più la camicia che il giubbone. _The shirt is nearer than the
doublet._

Accostati a’ buoni e sarai uno di essi. _Associate with the good and
you will be one of them._

A chi compra non bastan cent’occhi, e à chi vende ne basta un solo.
_For the buyer a hundred eyes are too few, for the seller one is
enough._

A chi dici il tuo secreto, doni la tua libertà. _To whom you tell your
secret you surrender your freedom._

A chi fa male, mai mancano scuse. _The wrong-doer never lacks excuses._

A chi fugge, ogni cosa dà impaccio. _The fugitive finds everything
impede him._

A chi ha testa, non manca cappello. _He who has a head won’t want for a
hat._

A chi la riesce bene, è tenuto per savio. _He who succeeds is reputed
wise._

A chi non si lascia consigliare, non si può aiutare. _There is no
helping him who will not be advised._

A chi parla poco, gli basta la metà del cervello. _Half a brain is
enough for him who says little._

A chi piace il bere, parla sempre di vino. _He who likes drinking is
always talking of wine._

A chi ti dà un porco, tu gli puoi ben dar una carbonata. _To him who
gives you a pig you may well give a rasher._

A chi ti può torre ciò che hai, dagli ciò che ti chiede. _To him who
can take what thou hast, give what he asks._

A chi troppo ride gli duole il cuore. _He who laughs overmuch may have
an aching heart._

A chi veglia tutto si rivela. _To him who watches, everything reveals
itself._

A chi vuole, non è cosa difficile. _Nothing is difficult to a willing
mind._

A chi vuole, non mancano modi. _Where there’s a will there’s a way._

A chi vuol fare, non manca che fare. _To him who is determined it
remains only to act._

A colomba pasciuta la vescia par amara. _Vetches seem bitter to the
full-cropped pigeon._

A conti vecchi contese nuove. _Old reckonings, new disputes._

Acqua che corre non porta veleno. _Running water carries no poison._

Acqua cheta vermini mena. _Still water breeds vermin._

Acqua, fumo, e mala femmina, cacciano la gente di casa. _Water, smoke,
and a vicious woman, drive men out of the house._

Acqua lontana non spegne fuoco vicino. _Water afar does not quench a
fire at hand._

Acqua passata non macina più. _Water past will not turn the mill._

Acqua torbida non fa specchio. _Muddy water won’t do for a mirror._

Acqua torbida non lava. _Dirty water does not wash clean._

Acquista buona fama e mettiti à dormire. _Get a good name and go to
sleep._

A cuor vile forza non giova. _Strength avails not a coward._

Adagio a’ mal passi. _Go softly at bad bits of road._

Ad albero caduto accétta, accétta. _To the fallen tree, hatchets!
hatchets!_

Ad arbor che cade ognun grida dàgli, dàgli. _When a tree is falling,
every one cries, down with it._

Ad arca aperta il giusto pecca. _At an open chest the righteous sins._

A dono nuovo non convien grazia vecchia. _Old thanks are not for new
gifts._

Ad occhio infermo nuoce la luce. _The light is painful to sore eyes._

Ad ogni santo la sua torcia. _To every saint his torch._

Ad ogni santo vien la sua festa. _Every saint has his festival._

Ad ogni uccello suo nido par bello. _Every bird thinks its own nest
beautiful._

Ad ogni volpe piace il pollaio. _Every fox likes a henroost._

Ad ognuno par più grave la croce sua. _Every one thinks his own cross
the heaviest._

Ad ora ad ora vola tutto il tempo. _Hour by hour time departs._

Ad un cieco mal può mostrarsi il cammino. _It is not easy to show the
way to a blind man._

Ad un colpo non cade à terra l’albero. _The tree is not felled at one
blow._

Ad un popolo pazzo, un prete spiritato. _A mad parish, a mad priest._

Ad un uomo dabbene avanza la metà del cervello; ad un tristo non basta
neanche tutto. _For an honest man half his wits are enough; the whole
is too little for a knave._

A fiume famoso non andar a pesca. _Don’t go a-fishing to a famous
stream._

A gatta che lecca spiedo non fidar arrosto. _A cat that licks the spit
is not to be trusted with roast meat._

A giovane cuor tutto è giuoco. _To a young heart everything is sport._

A giovano soldato vecchio cavallo. _An old horse for a young soldier._

Agli uomini ogni peccato mortale è veniale, alle donne ogni veniale è
mortale. _In men every mortal sin is venial, in women every venial sin
is mortal._

A goccia à goccia s’incava la pietra. _Drop by drop wears away the
stone._

A gran ruscello passate l’ultimo. _At a great river be the last to
pass._

A gran salita gran discesa. _The higher the rise the greater the fall._

A grassa cucina povertà è vicina. _A fat kitchen is next door to
poverty._

Ai mali estremi, estremi rimedi. _For extreme ills extreme remedies._

A la barba de’ pazzi il barbier impara a radere. _On a fool’s beard the
barber learns to shave._

Albero spesso trapiantato mai di frutti è caricato. _A tree often
transplanted is never loaded with fruit._

Al bugiardo non si crede la verità. _The liar is not believed when he
speaks the truth._

Al cattivo cane tosto vien la coda. _A cur’s tail grows fast._

Al confessore, medico, e avvocato, non tenere il ver celato. _Hide not
the truth from your confessor, your doctor, or your lawyer._

Al fin del giuoco si vede chi guadagna. _At the end of the game we see
who wins._

Al ladro fa paura anche un sorcio. _The thief is frightened even by a
mouse._

Al molino ed alla sposa, sempre manca qualche cosa. _A mill and a wife
are always in want of something._

Alla fama si va per varie strade. _Various are the roads to fame._

All’amico mondagli il fico, all’inimico il persico. _Peel a fig for
your friend, a peach for your enemy._

Alla pace si può sacrificar tutto. _Anything for a quiet life._

Alla pignatta che bolle non s’accostano le mosche. _Flies don’t light
on a boiling pot._

Alla porta chiusa il diavolo volge le spalle. _The devil turns away
from a closed door._

Alle belle donno le più volte toccano i brutti uomini. _Handsome women
generally fall to the lot of ugly men._

Alle volte più vale la feccia che il vino. _Sometimes the lees are
better than the wine._

Alle volte si dà un uovo per un bue. _Sometimes an egg is given for an
ox._

All’impossibile nessuno è tenuto. _No one is bound to do
impossibilities._

All’onor chi manca d’un momento, non lo ripara in anni cento. _A
hundred years cannot repair a moment’s loss of honour._

All’opera si conosce il maestro. _The workman is known by his work._

All’orsa paiono belli i suoi orsatti. _The she-bear thinks her cubs
pretty._

Al lume di lucerna ogni rustica par bella. _By lamplight every country
wench seems handsome._

Al nimico che fugge il ponte d’oro. _For the flying enemy a golden
bridge._

Al più potente ceda il più prudente. _The most prudent yields to the
strongest._

Al più triste porco vien la meglior pera. _The worst pig gets the best
pear._

Al primo colpo non casca l’albero. _The tree does not fall at the first
stroke._

Altra cosa è il dire, altra il fare. _Saying is one thing, doing
another._

Altri tempi altri costumi. _Different times different manners._

A Lucca ti vidi, a Pisa ti conobbi. _I saw you at Lucca, I knew you at
Pisa._

A lunga corda tira chi la morte altrui desidera. _He hauls at a long
rope who expects another’s death._

Al villano, se gli porgi il dito, ei prende la mano. _Give a clown your
finger he’ll grasp your fist._

Ama l’amico tuo col vizio suo. _Love your friend with his faults._

A mal passo l’onore. _At a dangerous passage yield precedence._

Amami, poco, ma continua. _Love me little and love me long._

Amante non sia che coraggio non ha. _Let him not be a lover who has not
courage._

Amato non sarai, se à te solo penserai. _You will not be loved if you
think of yourself alone._

Ambasciator non porta pena. _An ambassador beareth no blame._

Amicizia de’grandi vicinanza di leoni. _The friendship of the great is
fraternity with lions._

Amicizia riconciliata piaga mal saldata. _Reconciled friendship is a
wound ill salved._

Amico da sternuti, il più che se ne cava è un Dio ti aiuta. _He’s a
friend at sneezing-time,—the most that can be got from him is a “God
bless you.”_

Amico d’ognuno, amico di nessuno. _Everybody’s friend, nobody’s friend._

Amico, e guardati. _A friend, and look to thyself._

A molti puzza l’ambra. _Many stop their noses at ambergris._

Amor dà per mercede gelosia e rotta fede. _Love’s merchandise is
jealousy and broken faith._

Amor è cieco ma vede da lontano. _Love is blind but sees afar._

Amor è il vero prezzo con cui si compra amore. _Love is the true price
at which love is bought._

Amor e signoria non voglion compagnia. _Love and lordship like not
fellowship._

Amor non conosce travaglio. _Love knows not labour._

Amor regge il suo regno senza spada. _Love rules his kingdom without a
sword._

Amor regge senza legge. _Love rules without law._

Amor, tosse, e fumo malamente si nascondono. _Love, a cough, and smoke,
are hard to hide._

Amor vero non diventa mai canuto. _True love never grows old._

Amor vuol fede, e fede vuol fermezza. _Love demands faith, and faith
firmness._

A nave rotta ogni vento è contrario. _To a crazy ship every wind is
contrary._

Anche delle pecore contate ne mangia il lupo. _Even counted sheep are
eaten by the wolf._

Anche delle volpi si pigliano. _Even foxes are caught._

Anche i boschi hanno l’orecchie. _Even woods have ears._

Anche il diritto ha bisogno d’aiuto. _Even the just has need of help._

Anche il mar, che è si grande, si pacifica. _Even the sea, great as it
is, grows calm._

Anche il pazzo talvolta dice qualche parola da savio. _Even the fool
says a wise word sometimes._

Anche il sole passa sopra il fango, e non s’imbratta. _The sun passes
over filth and is not defiled._

Anche la mosca ha la sua collera. _Even a fly has its anger._

Anche la rana morderebbe se avesse denti. _Even a frog would bite if it
had teeth._

Anch’io so menar le oche a bere quando piove. _I too can lead the geese
to water when it rains._

Anco gli apostoli ebbero un Giuda. _Even among the apostles there was a
Judas._

Anco il cane col dimenar la coda si guadagna le spese. _Even the dog
gets bread by wagging his tail._

Anco il cavallo si stanca, sebben ha quattro piedi. _Even a horse,
though he has four feet, stumbles._

Ancor le volpi vecchie rimangono al laccio. _Even old foxes are caught
in the snare._

Anco trà le spine nascono le rose. _Among thorns grow roses._

A nessun confortator mai duole la testa. _No comforter’s head ever
aches._

A nessuno piace la giustizia à casa sua. _No one likes justice brought
home to his own door._

Anni e peccati sempre sono più che non si dice. _Years and sins are
always more than owned._

A penna a penna si pela l’oca. _Feather by feather the goose is
plucked._

Aperta ha la porta chiunque apporta. _Whoever brings finds the door
open for him._

Apri bocca, e fa ch’io ti conosca. _Open thy mouth that I may know
thee._

Arco per rallentar, piaga non sana. _Unbending the bow does not heal
the wound._

Arditamente batte alla porta chi buone nuove apporta. _He knocks boldly
at the door who brings good news._

Arte o sorte ne cava macchia. _Skill or fortune will efface the spots._

A’segnali si conoscono le balle. _By their marks the bales are known._

Asino che ha fame mangia d’ogni strame. _A hungry ass eats any straw._

Asino che ragghia poco fieno mangia. _A braying ass eats little hay._

Asino punto convien che trotti. _A goaded ass must needs trot._

A’sottili cascano le brache. _Cunning men’s cloaks sometimes fall._

Aspetta il porco alla quercia. _Look for the hog at the oak._

Aspettare e non venire, stare in letto e non dormire, ben servire e
non gradire, son tre cose da morire. _To expect what never comes, to
lie in bed and not sleep, to serve well and not be advanced, are three
things to die of._

Aspetta tempo e loco à far la tua vendetta, che la non si fa mai ben in
fretta. _Wait time and place to take your revenge, for it is never well
done in a hurry._

Assai acqua passa per il molino, che il molinaio non se n’accorge.
_Much water passes by the mill that the miller perceives not._

Assai basta, e troppo guasta. _Enough is enough, and too much spoils._

Assai ben balla à chi fortuna suona. _He dances well to whom fortune
pipes._

Assai dimanda chi ben serve e tace. _Who serves well and says nothing
makes claim enough._

Assai è ricco à chi non manca. _He is rich enough who does not want._

Assai guadagna, chi vano sperar perde. _He gains much who loses a vain
hope._

Assai presto si fa quel che si fa bene. _That is done soon enough which
is well done._

Assai romor e poca lana, disse colui che tosava la porca. _Great cry
and little wool, as the man said who shaved the sow._

Assai sa, chi non sa, se tacer sa. _He who knows nothing knows enough,
if he knows how to be silent._

Assenza nemica di amore; quanto lontan dall’occhio, tanto dal cuore.
_Absence is a foe to love; out of sight out of mind._

A tal labbra, tal lattuga. _Like lips, like lettuce._

A tal pozzo, tal secchio. _Like well, like bucket._

A tal santo, tal offerta. _Like saint, like offering._

A tavola non vi vuol vergogna. _At table bashfulness is out of place._

A tela ordita Dio manda il filo. _For a web begun God sends thread._

A torto si lamenta del mare, chi due volte ci vuol tornare. _He ought
not to complain of the sea who returns to it a second time._

Attacca il majo ad ogni uscio. _He hangs the May-branch at every door._
(_Alluding to the Italian custom of young men hanging out May-branches
overnight before the door of their mistress._)

A tutti non si adatta una sola scarpa. _The same shoe does not fit
every foot._

A un gran bugiardo ci vuol buona memoria. _A great liar has need of
good memory._

Aver sentito dire è mezza bugia. _To have “heard say” is half a lie._

Aver un occhio alla gatta, e l’altro alla padella. _To have one eye on
the cat and another on the frying-pan._

A veste logorata poca fede vien prestata. _A ragged coat finds little
credit._


B.

Baldezza di signor, cappel da matto. _Faith in a lord, a cap for the
fool._

Bandiera vecchia, onor di capitano. _An old flag is an honour to its
captain._

Barba bagnata è mezza rasa. _A beard well lathered is half-shaved._

Basta un matto per casa. _One fool is enough in a house._

Batti il buono e’ megliora, batti il cattivo e’ peggiora. _Chastise the
good and he will mend, chastise the bad and he will grow worse._

Batti il ferro quando è caldo. _Strike while the iron is hot._

Batti il villano, e lo avrai per amico. _Beat the churl and he will be
your friend._

Beata colei che di vecchio pazzo s’innamora. _Happy is she who is in
love with an old dotard._

Bel colpo non ammazzò mai uccello. _A fine shot never killed a bird._

Bella cosa tosto è rapita. _All that’s fair must fade._

Bella femmina che ride, vuol dire borsa che piange. _A beautiful woman
smiling, bespeaks a purse weeping._

Bella promessa lega il matto. _Fair promises bind fools._

Belle parole e mele fracide. _Fair words and rotten apples._

Belle parole, ma guarda la borsa. _Fair words, but look to your purse._

Belle parole non pascon i gatti. _Fair words won’t feed a cat._

Bellezza e follia sovente in compagnia. _Beauty and folly are often
companions._

Ben ama chi non oblia. _He loves well who does not forget._

Benchè la bugia sia veloce, la verità l’arriva. _Though a lie be swift,
truth overtakes it._

Benchè la volpe corra, i polli hanno le ale. _Though the fox runs, the
pullets have wings._

Ben è cieco chi non vede il sole. _He is very blind who cannot see the
sun._

Benedetto è quel male che vien solo. _Blessed is the misfortune that
comes alone._

Ben faremo, ben diremo, mal va la barca senza remo. _Say what we will,
do what we will, the boat goes but sorrily without oars._

Ben perduto è conosciuto. _A good thing lost is valued._

Berretta in mano non fece mai danno. _Cap in hand never did any harm._

Bevendo vien la sete. _Thirst comes from drinking._

Bevi del vino, e lascia andar l’acqua al mulino. _Drink wine and let
water go to the mill._

Biasimare i principi è pericolo, e il lodarli è bugia. _To censure
princes is perilous, and to praise them is lying._

Bisogna unger le ruote, chi vuol che il carro corra. _You must grease
the wheels if you would have the car run._

Bisogna voltar la vela secondo il vento. _You must shift your sail with
the wind._

Bocca chiusa ed occhi aperti. _Mouth shut and eyes open._

Bocca unta non può dir di no. _A greased mouth cannot say no._

Brutta cosa è il povero superbo e ’l ricco avaro. _A proud pauper and a
rich miser are contemptible beings._

Bue vecchio, solco diritto. _An old ox makes a straight furrow._

Bugie hanno corte le gambe. _Lies have short legs._

Buona incudine non tema martello. _A good anvil does not fear the
hammer._

Buon appetito non vuol salsa. _A good appetite does not want sauce._

Buona quella lima che doma il ferro senza strepito. _It is a good file
that cuts iron without making a noise._

Buona vita non può tenere, quel che serve senz’avere. _He cannot lead a
good life who serves without wages._

Buon cavallo e mal cavallo vuole sproni; buona femmina e mala femmina
vuol bastoni. _A good horse and a bad horse need the spur; a good woman
and a bad woman need the stick._

Buon cavallo non ha bisogno de’ sproni. _Never spur a willing horse._

Buon pagatore dell’altrui borsa è signore. _He who pays well is master
of other men’s purses._

Buon pagatore non si cura di dar buon pegno. _A good paymaster does not
hesitate to give good security._

Buon principio è la metà dell’opra. _Well begun is half done._

Buon principio fa buon fine. _A good beginning makes a good ending._

Buon vino fa buon sangue. _Good wine makes good blood._


C.

Cader della padella nelle bragie. _To fall out of the frying-pan into
the fire._

Cade un cavallo, che ha quattro gambe. _A horse falls though he has
four legs._

Cadono le miglior pere in bocca a’ porci. _The best pears fall into the
pigs’ mouths._

Calcio di cavalla non fece mai male a poledro. _The kick of a mare
never hurt a colt._

Can ch’abbaia non morde. _A barking cur does not bite._

Can che morde non abbaia in vano. _The dog that bites does not bark in
vain._

Can dell’ortolano non mangia la lattuga, e non la lascia mangiare agli
altri. _The gardener’s dog does not eat lettuce and will not let others
eat it._

Cane abbaia, e bue pasce. _The dog barks and the ox feeds._

Cane affamato non ha paura di bastone. _A hungry dog does not fear the
stick._

Cane di cucina non fu mai buon per la caccia. _A kitchen dog never was
good for the chase._

Cane vecchio non abbaia indarno. _An old dog does not bark for
nothing._

Can ringhioso e non forzoso, guai alla sua pelle. _The dog that is
quarrelsome and not strong, woe to his hide._

Can vecchio non s’avvezza a portar collare. _An old dog does not grow
used to the collar._

Capo grasso, cervello magro. _Fat head, lean brains._

Carestia prevista non venne mai. _Dearth foreseen never came._

Carica volontaria non carica. _A voluntary burthen is no burthen._

Caro costa quel che con preghi si compra. _That costs dear which is
bought with begging._

Caro mi vendi, e giusto mi misura. _Sell me dear, and measure me fair._

Casa fatta, possession disfatta. _The house completed, possession
defeated._

Casa il figlio quando vuoi, e la figlia quando puoi. _Marry your son
when you please, your daughter when you can._

Casa mia, casa mia, per piccina che tu sia, tu mi sembri una badìa.
_Home, dear home, small as thou art, to me thou art a palace._

Castello che dà orecchia si vuol rendere. _The fortress that parleys
soon surrenders._

Cattiva è quella lana che non si può tingere. _Bad is the wool that
cannot be died._

Cattive nuove presto corrono. _Ill news travels fast._

Cattivo è quel sacco che non si può rappezzare. _Bad is the sack that
will not bear patching._

Cavallo che corre non ha bisogna di sproni. _Spur not a willing horse._

Cavallo ingrassato tira calci. _A horse grown fat kicks._

Cavallo magro non tira calci. _A lean horse does not kick._

Cavallo scappato da sè si gastiga. _A runaway horse punishes himself._

Cava un chiodo, e pianta un cavicchio. _He takes out a nail and puts in
a pin._

Cerca cinque piedi al montone. _He is in search of a ram with five
feet._

Che ne può la gatta se la massaia è matta? _How can the cat help it if
the maid be a fool?_

Che sarà, sarà. _What will be, will be._

Chi abbisogna, non abbia vergogna. _He that wants should not be
bashful._

Chi affoga, grida ancor che non sia udito. _He that is drowning shouts
though he be not heard._

Chi altri giudica, sè condanna. _Who judges others, condemns himself._

Chi altri tribola, sè non posa. _Who troubles others has no rest
himself._

Chi ama, crede. _Who loves, believes._

Chiama l’arbore, ama il ramo. _Who loves the tree loves the branch._

Chi ama me, ama il mio cane. _Love me, love my dog._

Chi ama, teme. _Who loves, fears._

Chi asino è, e cervo esser si crede, al saltar del fosso sè ne avvede.
_He who is an ass and thinks himself a stag, finds his mistake when he
comes to leap the ditch._

Chi aspettar puole, ha ciò che vuole. _He who can wait obtains what he
wishes._

Chiave d’oro apre ogni porta. _A gold key opens every door._

Chi ben ama, ben gastiga. _Who loves well chastises well._

Chi ben comincia ha la metà dell’opra. _Well begun is half done._

Chi ben congettura, bene indovina. _He who guesses well prophesies
well._

Chi ben dona, caro vende, se villano non è chi prende. _Who gives well,
sells dear, if the receiver be not a churl._

Chi ben dorme, non sente le pulci. _He who sleeps well does not feel
the fleas._

Chi ben vive, ben predica. _He preaches well who lives well._

Chi biasima, vuol comprare. _He who decries, wants to buy._

Chi burla, si confessa. _He that jokes, confesses._

Chi burla, vien burlato. _The biter is sometimes bit._

Chi butta via oro con lo mani lo cerca co’ piedi. _He who throws away
money with his hands will seek it with his feet._

Chi canta, i suoi mali spaventa. _He who sings drives away sorrow._

Chi cerca mal, mal trova. _Harm watch, harm catch._

Chi cerca, trova, e talor quel che non vorrebbe. _He that seeks, finds,
and sometimes what he would rather not._

Chi colomba si fa, il falcon se la mangia. _He who makes himself a dove
is eaten by the hawk._

Chi compra a tempo, compra a buon mercato. _He who buys betimes buys
cheaply._

Chi compra ciò che pagar non può, vende ciò che non vuole. _He who buys
what he cannot pay for, sells what he would rather not._

Chi compra il magistrato, forza è che venda la giustizia. _He that buys
the office of magistrate must of necessity sell justice._

Chi compra la scopa, può anche comprar il manico. _He who buys the
broom can also buy the handle._

Chi compra terra, compra guerra. _Who buys land buys war._

Chi con l’occhio vede, di cuor crede. _Seeing is believing._

Chi contra il cielo getta pietra, in capo gli ritorna. _Who throws a
stone at the sky, it falls back on his head._

Chi dà del pane a’ cani d’altri, spesso viene abbaiato da suoi. _He who
gives bread to others’ dogs is often barked at by his own._

Chi dà, insegna a rendere. _Who gives, teaches a return._

Chi dà presto, dà il doppio. _He gives twice who gives in a trice._

Chi della serpa è punto, ha paura della lucertola. _He who has been
stung by a serpent is afraid of a lizard._

Chi dice i fatti suoi, mal tacerà quelli d’altrui. _He who tells his
own affairs will hardly keep secret those of others._

Chi dimanda non commanda. _He who demands does not command._

Chi dinanzi mi pinge, di dietro mi tinge. _Who paints me before
blackens me behind._

Chi di venti non è, di trenta non sa, di quaranta non ha, mai non sarà,
nè mai saprà, nè mai havra. _He that at twenty is not, at thirty knows
not, and at forty has not, will never be, nor ever know, nor ever have._

Chi divide il miele con l’orso ha la minor parte. _Who divides honey
with the bear, will be like to get the lesser share._

Chi dorme con cani si leva con pulci. _Who lies down with dogs gets up
with fleas._

Chi dorme non piglia pesci. _He who sleeps catches no fish._

Chi due lepri caccia, l’una non piglia e l’altra lascia. _He who hunts
two hares does not catch the one and lets the other escape._

Chi due padroni ha da servire, ad uno ha da mentire. _He who serves two
masters must lie to one of them._

Chi è al coperto quando piove, è ben matto se si muove. _He who is
under cover when it rains is a great fool if he stirs._

Chi è causa del suo male, pianga se stesso. _He who is the cause of his
own misfortune may bewail it himself._

Chi è dell’arte ne può ragionare. _He who is of the craft can discourse
about it._

Chi è diffamato, è mezzo impiccato. _He who hath an ill name is half
hanged._ (_Give a dog an ill name, and you may as well hang him._)

Chi è imbarcato col diavolo, ha da passar in sua compagnia. _He who is
embarked with the devil must make the passage in his company._

Chi è in difetto, è in sospetto. _He that is in fault is in suspicion._

Chi è in inferno non sà ciò che sia cielo. _He who is in hell knows not
what heaven is._

Chi è in peccato, crede che tutti dicano male di lui. _He who is guilty
believes that all men speak ill of him._

Chi è nato per la forca mai s’annegherà. _He that is born to be hanged
will never be drowned._

Chi è ritto può cadere. _He that stands may fall._

Chi erra nelle decine, erra nelle migliaja. _Who errs in the tens errs
in the thousands._

Chi esce di commissione, paga del suo. _He that exceeds his commission
must answer for it at his own cost._

Chi fa à suo modo, non gli duole il capo. _He who does as he likes has
no headache._

Chi fabbrica su quel d’altri, perde la calcina e le pietre. _He who
builds on another’s ground loses his stone and mortar._

Chi fabbrica vicino alla strada, ha molti sindicatori. _He who builds
by the roadside has many surveyors._

Chi fa il conto senza l’oste, gli convien farlo due volte. _He that
reckons without his host must reckon again._

Chi fa la casa in piazza, o la fa troppo alta o troppo bassa. _He who
builds a house in the market-place, builds either too high or too low._

Chi fa li fatti suoi, non s’imbratta le mani. _He who doth his own
business defileth not his fingers._

Chi fa quel ch’e’ può, non fa mai bene. _Who does all he may never does
well._

Chi fonda in sul popolo, fonda in sulla rena. _Who builds on the mob
builds on sand._

Chi frequenta la cucina, sente di fumo. _Who frequents the kitchen
smells of smoke._

Chi giura, è bugiardo. _He who swears is a liar._

Chi ha buon cavallo in stalla, può andare a piedi. _He who has a good
horse in his stable may go on foot._

Chi ha buon vicino, ha buon mattino. _He who has a good neighbour has a
good morning._

Chi ha capo di cera, non vada al sole. _He who has a head of wax must
not walk in the sun._

Chi ha cattivo nome, è mezzo impiccato. _He who has a bad name is half
hanged._

Chi ha coda di paglia, ha sempre paura che gli pigli fuoco. _He who has
a straw tail is always in fear of its catching fire._

Chi ha compagno, ha padrone. _He who has a mate has a master._

Chi ha da esser zanaiuolo, nasce col manico in mano. _He who is meant
to be a basket-carrier is born with the handle in his hand._

Chi ha danari da buttar via, metta gli operaj, e non vi stia. _He who
has money to throw away, let him employ workmen, and not stand by._

Chi ha denti, non ha pane; e chi ha pane, non ha denti. _He who has
teeth has no bread, and he who has bread has no teeth._

Chi ha de’ pani, ha de’ cani. _He who has loaves has dogs._

Chi ha, è. _Who has, is._

Chi ha il lupo per compagno, porti il cane sotto il mantello. _Who
makes the wolf his companion should carry a dog under his cloak._

Chi ha l’amor nel petto, ha lo sprone a’ fianchi. _Who has love in his
heart has spurs in his sides._

Chi ha lingua in bocca, può andar per tutto. _Who has a tongue in his
head can go all the world over._

Chi ha mala lingua, bisogna che abbia buone reni. _He who has a bad
tongue should have good loins._

Chi ha mangiato il diavolo, mangia anche le corna. _He that has
swallowed the devil may swallow his horns._

Chi ha passato il guado, sa quant’acqua tiene. _He who has crossed the
ford knows how deep it is._

Chi ha pazienza, ha i tordi grassi a un quattrin l’uno. _Who has
patience may get fat thrushes at a farthing apiece._

Chi ha pazienza, vede la sua vendetta. _Who has patience sees his
revenge._

Chi ha paura del diavolo, non fa roba. _He that is afraid of the devil
does not grow rich._

Chi ha paura d’ogni fronde, non vada al bosco. _Who is in fear of every
leaf must not go into the wood._

Chi ha poca vergogna, tutto il mondo è suo. _Who hath little shame the
world is all his own._

Chi ha qualche cosa, è qualche cosa. _Who has something is something._

Chi ha ragion, teme; chi ha torto, spera. _Who is in the right fears,
who is in the wrong hopes._

Chi ha sospetto, di rado è in difetto. _He who suspects is seldom at
fault._

Chi ha tegoli di vetro, non tiri sassi al vicino. _He who has a glass
roof should not throw stones at his neighbour’s._

Chi ha terra, ha guerra. _He who has land has war._

Chi ha un sol porco, facilmente l’ingrassa. _He that has but one pig
easily fattens it._

Chi la fa, se la dimentica, ma non chi la riceve. _He who does the
wrong forgets it, but not he who receives it._

Chi lingua ha, a Roma va. _He who has a tongue, may go to Rome._

Chi mal comincia, peggio finisce. _He who begins ill finishes worse._

Chi mal pensa, mal abbia. _Evil be to him who evil thinks._

Chi mal semina, mal raccoglie. _Who sows ill reaps ill._

Chi mangia peri col suo signore, non sceglie i migliori. _He who eats
pears with his master should not choose the best._

Chi molte cose comincia, poche ne finisce. _He who begins many things
finishes few._

Chi mostra i quattrini, mostra il giudizio. _He that shows his money
shows his judgment._

Chi muta paese, muta ventura. _Who changes country changes luck._

Chi muta stato, muta fortuna. _Who changes his condition changes
fortune._

Chi nasce bella, nasce maritata. _She who is born a beauty is born
betrothed._

Chi nasce matto, non guarisce mai. _Who is born a fool is never cured._

Chi nel fango casca, quanto più si dimena, più s’imbratta. _When a
man has fallen into the mire, the more he flounders the more he fouls
himself._

Chi niente dice, mai non mente. _He who says nothing never lies._

Chi niente sa, di niente dubita. _He who knows nothing never doubts._

Chi non arde, non accende. _Who glows not burns not._

Chi non dà fine al pensare, non dà principio al fare. _Who has never
done thinking never begins doing._

Chi non fallisce, non arricchisce. _He that never fails never grows
rich._

Chi non fa quando può, non fa quando vuole. _He who does not when he
can, cannot when he will._

Chi non ha cuore, abbia gambe. _Who hath no courage must have legs._

Chi non ha danari in borsa, abbia miel in bocca. _Who has no money in
his purse must have honey in his mouth._

Chi non ha debito, non ha credito. _He who is without debt is without
credit._

Chi non ha figliuoli, non sa che cosa sia amore. _Who has no children
does not know what love is._

Chi non ha niente, non teme niente. _Who has nothing fears nothing._

Chi non ha, non è. _Who has not is not._

Chi non ha nulla, non è nulla. _Who has nothing is nothing._

Chi non ha piaghe, se ne fa. _Who has no plagues makes himself some._

Chi non ha quattrini, non abbia voglie. _Who has no money must have no
wishes._

Chi non ha testa, abbia gambe. _Who has no head should have legs._

Chi non ha vergogna, tutto il mondo è suo. _Who has no shame all the
world is his own._

Chi non può batter il cavallo, batte la sella. _Who cannot beat the
horse let him beat the saddle._

Chi non può far la sua vendetta è debole, chi non vuole è vile. _He who
cannot revenge himself is weak, he who will not is contemptible._

Chi non può, sempre vuole. _He who is unable is always willing._

Chi non rompe le uova, non fa la frittata. _There is no making pancakes
without breaking the eggs._

Chi non sa adulare, non sa conversare. _Who knows not how to flatter
knows not how to talk._

Chi non sa dissimulare, non sa regnare. _Who knows not how to dissemble
knows not how to reign._

Chi non sa orare, vada in mare a navigare. _Who knows not how to pray
let him go sail the sea._

Chi non s’arrischia non guadagna. _He who risks nothing can gain
nothing._ (_Nothing venture nothing have._)

Chi non stima altri che sè, è felice quanto un re. _He who esteems none
but himself is as happy as a king._

Chi non va, non vede; chi non prova, non crede. _Who goes not, sees
not; who proves not, believes not._

Chi non vede il fondo, non passi l’acqua. _Don’t cross the water unless
you see the bottom._

Chi non vuol affaticarsi in questo mondo, non ci nasca. _He that will
not strive in this world should not have come into it._

Chi non vuol piedi sul collo, non s’inchini. _Who would not have feet
set on his neck, let him not stoop._

Chi non vuol rassomigliarsi al lupo, non porti la sua pelle. _Who does
not wish to be like the wolf let him not wear its skin._

Chi non vuol servir ad un sol signore, a molti ha da servire. _He who
will not serve one master must needs serve many._

Chiodo con chiodo da se si cava. _One nail drives out another._

Chi offende, non dimentichi. _Let the injurer not forget._

Chi offende, non perdona mai. _The injurer never forgives._

Chi offende, scrive nella rena; chi è offeso nel marmo. _Who offends
writes on sand; who is offended, on marble._

Chi paga debito, fa capitale. _Who pays a debt creates capital._

Chi paga innanzi, è servito indietro. _Who pays beforehand is served
behindhand._

Chi parla, semina; chi tace, raccoglie. _The talker sows, the listener
reaps._

Chi perde, ha sempre torto. _He who loses is always in fault._

Chi piglia l’anguilla per la coda, e la donna per la parola, può dir
che non tiene niente. _Who takes an eel by the tail and a woman at her
word, may say he holds nothing._

Chi piglia leone in assenza, teme la talpa in presenza. _Who takes a
lion at a distance fears a mole present._

Chi pinge il fiore, non gli dà l’odore. _He that paints a flower does
not give it perfume._

Chi più intende, più perdona. _Who knows most, forgives most._

Chi più sa, meno crede. _Who knows most believes least._

Chi più sa, meno parla. _Who knows most says least._

Chi pratica co’grandi, l’ultimo è a tavola, e’l primo a’strapazzi.
_Who dangles after the great is the last at table and the first to be
cuffed._

Chi prende, si vende. _Who accepts, sells himself._

Chi primo arriva al molin, primo macina. _The first at the mill grinds
first._

Chi raro viene, vien bene. _Who comes seldom, is welcome._

Chi ride del mal d’altri, ha il suo dietro l’uscio. _Who laughs at
others’ ills, has his own behind the door._

Chi s’aiuta, Dio l’aiuta. _God helps him who helps himself._

Chi sa la strada, può andar di trotto. _He who knows the road can ride
full trot._

Chi sa meglio nuotare, è il primo a sommergersi. _The best swimmer is
the first to drown himself._

Chi sa poco, presto lo dice. _He who knows but little quickly tells it._

Chi semina spine, non vada scalzo. _Who sows thorns should not go
barefoot._

Chi serba, serba al gatto. _Who saves, saves for the cat._

Chi serve al commune, ha cattivo padrone. _He who serves the public has
a sorry master._

Chi serve al commune, serve nessuno. _Who serves the public, serves no
one._

Chi servo si fa, servo s’aspetta. _He who makes himself a servant is
expected to remain a servant._

Chi si affoga, s’attaccherebbe a’ rasoj. _A drowning man would catch at
razors._

Chi si è scottato una volta, l’altra vi soffia su. _He who has scalded
himself once blows the next time._

Chi si fa fango, il porco lo calpestra. _He that makes himself dirt is
trod on by the swine._

Chi si fa pecorella, i lupi la mangiano. _Make yourself a sheep and the
wolves will eat you._

Chi si lascia mettere in spalla la capra, indi a poco è sforzato a
portar la vacca. _He who lets the goat be laid on his shoulders is soon
after forced to carry the cow._

Chi si loda, s’imbroda. _He who praises himself befouls himself._

Chi si marita in fretta, stenta adagio. _Marry in haste, repent at
leisure._

Chi si scusa, s’accusa. _Who excuses himself accuses himself._

Chi si scusa senz’esser accusato, fa chiaro il suo peccato. _Who
excuses himself without being accused makes his fault manifest._

Chi soffia nella polvere, se ne empie gli occhi. _He who blows upon
dust fills his eyes with it._

Chi sta a vedere, ha due terzi del gioco. _He who looks on has
two-thirds of the game._

Chi sta bene, non si muova. _Let him who is well off stay where he is._

Chi tace, acconsente. _Silence gives consent._

Chi tardi arriva, mal alloggia. _The late comer is ill lodged._

Chi tocca la pece, s’imbratta. _He who touches pitch defiles himself._

Chi troppo abbraccia, nulla stringe. _He who grasps too much holds
nothing fast._

Chi tutto nega, tutto confessa. _He who denies all confesses all._

Chi tutto vuole, tutto perde. _All covet, all lose._

Chi un ne castiga, cento ne minaccia. _He who chastises one threatens a
hundred._

Chi va al mulino, s’infarina. _He who goes to the mill gets befloured._

Chi va, lecca, e chi sta, secca. _Who moves picks up, who stands still
dries up._

Chi va piano, va sano, e chi va sano, va lontano. _Who goes softly goes
safely, and he that goes safely goes far._

Chi va, vuole; chi manda, non se ne cura. _Who goes himself is in
earnest, who sends is indifferent._

Chi vien dietro, serra l’uscio. _The last comer shuts the door._

Chi vive a minuto, fà le spese a’ suoi ed agli altri. _He who buys by
the pennyworth keeps his own house and other men’s too._

Chi vive tra lupi, impara a urlare. _He who lives among wolves learns
to howl._

Chi vuol amici assai, ne pruovi pochi. _Who would have many friends let
him test but few._

Chi vuol ammazzar il suo cane, basta che dica ch’è arrabbiato. _He who
wants his dog killed has only to say he’s mad._

Chi vuol andar salvo per lo mondo, bisogna aver occhio di falcone,
orecchio d’asino, viso di scimia, bocca di porcello, spalle di camello,
e gambe di cervo. _To go safely through the world you must have the eye
of a falcon, the ear of an ass, the face of an ape, the mouth of a pig,
the shoulders of a camel, and the legs of a deer._

Chi vuol arricchire in un anno, è impiccato in sei mesi. _He who would
be rich in a year gets hanged in six months._

Chi vuol assai, non dimandi poco. _He who wants a good deal must not
ask for a little._

Chi vuol con piacer mangiare, non veda cucinare. _He who would relish
his food must not see it cooked._

Chi vuol dar al cane, trova facilmente il bastone. _He that would beat
his dog can easily find a stick._

Chi vuol dell’acqua chiara, vada alla fonte. _He who would have clear
water should go to the fountain head._

Chi vuol esser lungo tempo vecchio, bisogna cominciar a buon’ora. _He
who would be long an old man must begin betimes._

Chi vuol esser mal servito tenga assai famiglia. _He that would be ill
served should keep plenty of servants._

Chi vuol goder la festa, digiuni la vigilia. _He who would enjoy the
feast should fast on the eve._

Chi vuol il lavoro mal fatto, paghi innanzi tratto. _If you would have
your work ill done, pay beforehand._

Chi vuol molti amici, non n’ha nessuno. _He that seeks to have many
friends never has any._

Chi vuol presto e ben, faccia da se. _He that would have a thing done
quickly and well must do it himself._

Chi vuol Quaresima corta, faccia debiti da pagar a Pasqua. _Who wishes
for a short Lent let him contract debts to be paid at Easter._

Chi vuol riposare, convien travagliare. _He who would rest must work._

Chi vuol saldar piaga, non la maneggi. _He that would heal a wound must
not handle it._

Chi vuol turar la bocca a tutti, bisogna che abbia assai farina. _He
who would stop every man’s mouth must have a great deal of meal._

Ciascuno ha un matto nella manica. _Every man has a fool in his sleeve._

Ci è chi vede male, e vorrebbe veder peggio. _There are some who see
ill, and would like to see worse._

Cieco è l’occhio, se l’animo è distratto. _The eye is blind if the mind
is absent._

Ciò che si usa, non ha scusa. _That which is customary requires no
excuse._

Città affamata tosto è espugnata. _A starved town is soon forced to
surrender._

Coda d’asino non fa crivello. _An ass’s tail will not make a sieve._

Cogli la rosa, e lascia star le spine. _Pluck the rose and leave the
thorns._

Colle chiavi d’oro s’apre ogni porta. _The golden key opens every door._

Col tempo e con la paglia, si maturan le nespole. _With time and straw
medlars ripen._

Col Vangelo si può diventare eretici. _With the Gospel men may become
heretics._

Come l’arbore è caduto, ognun vi corre colla scure a far legna. _When
the tree is down every one runs to it with a hatchet to cut wood._

Comincia a diventar cattivo chi si tien buono. _He begins to grow bad
who believes himself good._

Compra il letto d’un gran debitore. _Buy the bed of a great debtor._

Con arte e con inganno si vive mezzo l’anno; con inganno e con arte
si vive l’altra parte. _With art and knavery we live through half the
year; with knavery and art we live through the other._ Con la pelle
del cane si sana la morditura. _With the skin of the dog its bite is
cured._

Con la voglia cresce la doglia. _With wishing comes grieving._

Con la volpe convien volpeggiare. _With the fox one must play the fox._

Conoscon gl’infelici quali siano i veri amici. _The unfortunate know
who are their real friends._

Con poco cervello si governa il mondo. _The world is governed with
little brains._

Contento io, contento il mondo. _I being satisfied, the world is
satisfied._

Contesa vecchia tosto si fa nuova. _An old quarrel is easily renewed._

Contro amore non è consiglio. _Counsel is nothing against love._

Corpo satollo non crede al digiuno. _The full belly does not believe in
hunger._

Corre lontano chi non torna mai. _He runs far who never turns._

Corta coda non para mosche. _A short tail won’t keep off flies._

Corte Romana non vuol pecora senza lana. _The court of Rome likes not
sheep without wool._

Corvi con corvi non si cavan gli occhi. _Ravens do not peck out ravens’
eyes._

Cosa fatta capo ha. _A thing done has a head. (The exultation of an
ancient sculptor on his satisfactorily completing the head of his
statue.)_

Costa men del don quel che si compra. _What is bought is cheaper than a
gift._

Credenza è morta, il mal pagar l’uccise. _Credit is dead, bad pay
killed it._

Credi al vantatore come al mentitore. _Believe a boaster as you would a
liar._

Cuor forte rompe cattiva sorte. _A stout heart overcomes ill fortune._


D.

Da cattivo pagatore togliete paglia. _From a bad paymaster take
straw_—i.e. _any trifle._

Da chi mi fido, mi guardi Iddio; da chi non mi fido, mi guarderò io.
_From those I trust God guard me, from those I mistrust I will guard
myself._

Da chi ti dona, guardati. _Beware of him who makes you presents._

Dà del tuo a chi ha del suo. _Give to him that has._

Dà tempo al tempo. _Give time time._

Dal conto sempre manca il lupo. _The wolf is always left out of the
reckoning._

Dal detto al fatto vi è un gran tratto. _From saying to doing is a long
way._

Dall’acqua cheta, mi guardi Iddio; che dalla corrente, mi guarderò io.
_From still water God keep me; from running water I will keep myself._

Dalla mano alla bocca si perde la zuppa. _Between the hand and the
month the soup is spilt._

Dalla neve o cotta o pesta non caverai altro che acqua. _From snow
whether cooked or pounded you will get nothing but water._

Dalla rapa non si cava sangue. _There is no getting blood from a
turnip._

Dallo stesso fior l’ape cava il miele, e la vespe il fiele. _From the
same flower the bee extracts honey and the wasp gall._

Dall’unghia si conosce il leone. _The lion is known by his claws._

Danari di poveri e arme di poltroni si veggono spesso. _Poor men’s
money and cowards’ weapons are often flourished._

Dannoso è il dono che toglie la libertà. _Injurious is the gift that
takes away freedom._

Da stagione tutto è buono. _Everything is good in its season._

Date bere al prete, che il chierico ha sete. _Give the priest drink,
for the clerk is thirsty._

De’ grandi e de’ morti o parla bene, o taci. _Of the great and of the
dead either speak well or say nothing._

Dei gusti non se ne disputa. _There’s no disputing about tastes._

Dell’amico bene; del nemico nè bene nè male. _Speak well of your
friend; of your enemy neither well nor ill._

Del can che morde, il pelo sana. _A hair of the dog cures the bite._

Del cervello ognuno si pensa d’averne più che parte. _Every one thinks
he has more than his share of brains._

Del cuoio d’altri si fan larghe stringhe. _Broad thongs may be cut from
other men’s leather._

Del giudizio, ognun ne vende. _Of judgment every one has a stock on
hand for sale._

Dell’albero, non si giudica dalla scorza. _The tree is not to be judged
of by its bark._

Della sua istessa colpa amor è scusa. _Love is an excuse for its own
faults._

Del senno di poi è piena ogni fossa. _Every ditch is full of after-wit._

Del tempo passato non vi è appello. _There is no appeal from time past._

Del tutto non è savio chi non sa far il pazzo. _He is not a thorough
wise man who cannot play the fool on occasion._

Del vero s’adira l’uomo. _It is truth that makes a man angry._

Dentro da un orecchio e fuori dall’altro. _In at one ear and out at the
other._

De’ peccati de’ signori fanno penitenza i poveri. _Poor men do penance
for rich men’s sins._

Di’ all’amico il tuo segreto, e ti terrà il piè sul collo. _Tell your
secret to your friend and he will set his foot on your neck._

Di buona volontà sta pieno l’inferno. _Hell is full of good intentions._

Di casa la gatta il topo non esce a corpo pieno. _The mouse does not
leave the cat’s house with a bellyful._

Dico a te figliuola, intendilo tu nuora. _I speak to you, daughter;
hear it daughter-in-law._

Di cosa che non ti cale, non dir nè ben nè male. _Of what does not
concern you say nothing, good or bad._

Di dove meno si pensa, si leva la lepre. _The hare starts from where it
is least expected._

Di’ il fatto tuo, e lascia far al diavolo. _Tell everybody your
business and the devil will do it for you._

Di mal erba non si fà buon fieno. _Bad grass does not make good hay._

Dimmi con chi vai, e ti dirò chi sei. _Tell me the company you keep,
and I’ll tell you what you are._

Di notte tutti i gatti sono neri. _By night all cats are black._

Di novello tutto par bello. _Everything new is beautiful._

Dio ci manda la carne, ma il diavolo i cuochi. _God sends meat and the
devil sends cooks._

Dio guarisce, e il medico è ringraziato. _God heals and the doctor has
the thanks._

Dio manda il freddo secondo i panni. _God sends cold according to the
clothes._

Dio mi guardi da chi non bee. _God save me from one who does not drink._

Dio mi guardi da chi studia un libro solo. _God save me from him who
studies but one book._

Dio mi guardi da chi ha una faccenda sola. _God save me from him who
has but one occupation._

Dio non manda se non quel che si può portare. _God sends nothing but
what can be borne._

Di questo mondo ciascuno n’ha quanto se ne toglie. _Of this world each
man has as much as he takes._

Dio ti salvi da un cattivo vicino, e da un principiante di violino.
_God save you from a bad neighbour, and from a beginner on the fiddle._

Di padre santalotto figlio diavolotto. _The father a saint the son a
devil._

Di picciol uomo spesso grand’ombra. _A little man often casts a long
shadow._

Di rado il medico piglia medicina. _The doctor seldom takes physic._

Di rado visto, presto scordato. _Seldom seen soon forgotten._

Dispicca l’impiccato, e impiccherà poi te. _Take down a thief from the
gallows and he will hang you up._

Di tre cose il diavol si fa insalata: di lingue d’avvocati, di dita
di notari, e la terza è riservata. _Of three things the devil makes a
salad: advocates’ tongues, notaries’ fingers, and a third that shall be
nameless._

Di tutte le arti maestro è amore. _Love is master of all arts._

Di uovo bianco spesso pulcin nero. _Out of a white egg often comes a
black chick._

Doglia di moglie morta dura fino alla porta. _Grief for a dead wife
lasts to the door._

Dolce vivanda vuole salsa acerba. _Sweet meat requires sour sauce._

Dolor di capo non toglie la corona reale. _A crown is no cure for the
headache._

Domanda al mio caro se sono ladro. _Ask my chum if I am a thief._

Domandar chi nacque prima, l’uovo o la gallina. _Ask which was born
first, the hen or the egg._

Donar si chiama pescar. _Giving is fishing._

Don differito, e troppo aspettato, non è donato, ma caro venduto. _A
gift delayed, and long expected, is not given, but sold dear._

Donna che dona di rado è buona; donna che piglia è nell’ altrui
artiglia. _The woman who gives is seldom good; the woman who accepts is
in the power of the giver._

Donna di finestra, uva di strada. _A woman who loves to be at the
window is like a bunch of grapes on the wayside._

Donna si lagna, donna si duole, donna s’ammala quando la vuole. _A
woman’s in pain, a woman’s in woe, a woman is ill, when she likes to be
so._

Donne, asini, e noci voglion le mani atroci. _Women, asses, and nuts,
require strong hands._

Donne, preti, e polli non son mai satolli. _Women, priests, and
poultry, never have enough._

Dopo che i cavalli sono presi, serrar la stalla. _To lock the stable
after the horses are taken._

Dopo il radere non ci è più che tosare. _After shaving there is nothing
to shear._

Dopo un papa se ne fa un altro. _After one pope another is made._

Dove bisognan rimedj, il sospirar non vale. _Where remedies are needed,
sighing avails not._

Dove ci manca la pelle di leone, convien cucirvi cuoi di volpe. _Where
the lion’s skin falls short, piece it out with that of the fox._

Dove è grand’amore, quivi è gran dolore. _Where there is great love
there is great pain._

Dove è il Papa, ivi è Roma. _Where the Pope is there is Rome._

Dov’è l’amore, là è l’occhio. _Where love is there the eye is._

Dove è manco cuore, quivi è più lingua. _Where there is least heart
there is most tongue._

Dove entra il bere, se n’esce il sapere. _When the wine’s in the wit’s
out._

Dove entra il vino, esce la vergogna. _When wine enters modesty
departs._

Dove il dente duole, la lingua v’inciampa. _The tongue goes to where
the tooth aches._

Dove il fiume ha più fondo, fa minor strepito. _Where the river is
deepest it makes least noise._

Dove la siepe è bassa, ognun vuol passare. _Where the hedge is low
every one will cross it._

Dove la voglia è pronta, le gambe son leggiere. _When the will is
prompt the legs are nimble._

Dove l’oro parla, ogni lingua tace. _When gold speaks every tongue is
silent._

Dove l’uscio è basso, bisogna inchinarsi. _He must stoop that has a low
door._

Dove non basta la pelle del leone, bisogna attaccarvi quella della
volpe. _Where the skin of the lion does not suffice, we must join that
of the fox._

Dove non è egualità, mai perfetto amor sarà. _Where there is not
equality there never can be perfect love._

Dove non si crede, l’acqua rompe. _The water breaks out where it is not
expected._

Dove non sono i cani, la volpe è re. _Where there are no dogs the fox
is a king._

Dove sono molti cuochi, la minestra sarà troppo salata. _Where there
are too many cooks the soup will be too salty._

Dove il lupo trovò un agnello, ve ne cerca uno novello. _Where the wolf
found a lamb he looks for another._

Dove va la nave, può andar il brigantino. _Where the ship goes the brig
can go._

Due donne e un’oca fanno un mercato. _Two women and a goose make a
market._

Due teste son migliori che una. _Two heads are better than one._

Dura più l’incudine che il martello. _The anvil lasts longer than the
hammer._

Duro a vecchia licenza nuova legge. _Hard is a new law imposed on old
licence._

Duro con duro non fece mai buon muro. _Hard upon hard never made a good
wall._


E.

E ardito il gallo sopra il suo letame. _The cock is bold on his own
dunghill._

E bello predicare il digiuno a corpo pieno. _It is easy to preach
fasting with a full belly._

E bene aver degli amici per tutto. _It is good to have friends
everywhere._

E buon comprare quando un altro vuol vendere. _It is good to buy when
another wants to sell._

E buon tenere i panni a chi nuota. _It is good to hold the clothes of
one who is swimming._

E come l’ancora, che sta sempre nel mare e non impara mai nuotare. _He
is like the anchor that is always in the sea, yet does not learn to
swim._

E facile far paura al toro dalla finestra. _It is easy to threaten a
bull from a window._

Egli ben sa dove la spina il punge. _He knows well where the thorn
pricks him._

Egli dà le pecore in guardia al lupo. _He sets the wolf to guard the
sheep._

Egli è buono a mandarlo per la morte. _He would be a good one to send
for death._

Egli ha bel dir bugie chi viene da lontano. _He may lie safely who
comes from afar._

Egli ha fatto come quel Perugino, che subito che gli fu rotto il capo,
corse a casa per la celata. _He has done like the Perugian who, when
his head was broken, ran home for his helmet._

Egli misura gli altri con la sua canna. _He measures others with his
own yard._

Egli sa dove il diavolo tiene la coda. _He knows where the devil
carries his tail._

Egli scannerebbe una cimice per bersi il sangue. _He would slaughter a
bug to drink its blood._

Egli vende l’uccello in su la frasca. _He sells the bird on the branch._

Egli venderebbe sino alla sua parte del sole. _He would sell even his
share of the sun._

Ei grida pria d’esser battuto. _He cries out before he is hurt._

E la peggior ruota quella che fa più rumore. _The worst wheel creaks
most._

E mala cosa esser cattivo, ma è peggiore esser conosciuto. _It is a bad
thing to be a knave, but worse to be known for one._

E mal rubare a casa de’ ladri. _It is not easy to steal in thieves’
houses._

E meglio aver oggi un uovo che domani una gallina. _Better have an egg
to-day than a hen to-morrow._

E meglio aver un’ape sola che un esercito di mosche. _Better have one
bee than a host of flies._

E meglio cader dalla finestra che dal tetto. _Better to fall from the
window than the roof._

E meglio dare che aver a dare. _Better give than have to give._

E meglio dar la lana che la pecora. _Better give the wool than the
sheep._

E meglio domandar che errare. _Better to ask than go astray._

E meglio esser capo di gatto che coda di leone. _Better be the head of
a cat than the tail of a lion._

E meglio esser capo di lucertola che coda di dracone. _Better be the
head of a lizard than the tail of a dragon._

E meglio esser solo che mal accompagnato. _Better alone than in bad
company._

E meglio esser uccel di bosco che di gabbia. _Better be a bird of the
wood than a bird in the cage._

E meglio il cuor felice che la borsa. _A happy heart is better than a
full purse._

E meglio invidia che pietà. _Better be envied than pitied._

E meglio lasciare che mancare. _It is better to leave than to lack._

E meglio perder la sella che il cavallo. _Better lose the saddle than
the horse._

E meglio piegare che rompere. _Better bend than break._

E meglio sdrucciolare col piè che con la lingua. _Better slip with the
foot than with the tongue._

E meglio sentir cantar il rossignuolo che rodere il topo. _It is better
to hear the nightingale sing than the mouse gnaw._

E meglio stuzzicare un cane che una vecchia. _It is better to irritate
a dog than an old woman._

E meglio tardi che mai. _Better late than never._

E meglio una volta che mai. _Better once than never._

E meglio un magro accordo che una grassa sentenza. _Better a lean
agreement than a fat sentence._

E meglio un papa vivo che dieci morti. _One living pope is better than
ten dead._

E meglio un prossimo vicino che un lontano cugino. _A near neighbour is
better than a distant cousin._

E meglio un uccello in gabbia che cento fuori. _A bird in the cage is
worth a hundred at large._

E meglio vin torbo che acqua chiara. _Thick wine is better than clear
water._

E’ non mi morse mai cane ch’io non avessi del suo pelo. _A dog never
bit me but I had some of his hair._

E’ non si grida mai al lupo che non sia in paese. _There is never a cry
of “Wolf!” but the wolf is in the district._

E padron del mondo chi lo disprezza, schiavo chi lo apprezza. _He is
the world’s master who despises it, its slave who prizes it._

E padrone della vita altrui chi la sua sprezza. _He is master of
another man’s life who is indifferent to his own._

E picciola la punta della spina, ma chi sente il dolore non se ne
dimentica. _The point of the thorn is small, but he who has felt it
does not forget it._

E ricco chi non ha debiti. _He is rich who owes nothing._

Erra il prete all’altare. _The priest errs at the altar._

Errore non fa pagamento. _Error is no payment._

E sempre buono aver due corde al suo arco. _It is always good to have
two strings to your bow._

E troppo un nemico, e cento amici non bastano. _One enemy is too many,
and a hundred friends are too few._

E un cattivo boccone quello che affoga. _It’s a bad mouthful that
chokes._

E un mal giuoco dove nessun guadagna. _It is a bad game where nobody
wins._

E’ va più d’un asino al mercato. _There goes more than one ass to
market._


F.

Fa bene, e non guardare a chi. _Do good, and care not to whom._

Facilmente si trova un bastone per dar ad un cane. _It is easy to find
a stick to beat a dog._

Fammi indovino, e ti farò ricco. _Make me a prophet and I will make you
rich._

Fanciulli piccioli, dolor di testa; fanciulli grandi, dolor di cuore.
_Little children and headaches, great children and heartaches._

Fa quel che devi, e n’arrivi ciò che potrà. _Do what you ought come
what may._

Far conto dell’uovo non ancor nato. _Don’t reckon your eggs before they
are laid._

Far due chiodi ad un caldo. _To make two nails at one heat._

Far d’una mosca un elefante. _To make an elephant of a fly._

Fare e dire son due cose. _Saying and doing are two things._

Farò quel che potrò, e un poco manco per potervi durare. _I will do
what I can, and a little less, to be able to continue at it._

Fatta la legge, trovata la malizia. _No sooner is the law made than its
evasion is discovered._

Fatti di miele, e ti mangeran le mosche. _Make yourself honey and the
flies will eat you._

Felice non è chi d’esser non sa. _He is not happy who knows it not._

Femmine e galline per troppo andar si perdono. _Women and hens are lost
by too much gadding._

Fidati era un buon uomo, Nontifidare era meglio. _Trust was a good man,
Trust-not was a better._

Figlie e vetri son sempre in pericolo. _Lasses and glasses are always
in danger._

Finche vi è fiato vi è speranza. _While there’s life there’s hope._

Fino alla morte non si sa la sorte. _Until death there is no knowing
what may befall._

Forte è l’aceto di vin dolce. _Strong is the vinegar of sweet wine._

Fortuna, e dormi. _Fortune, and go to sleep._

Fra dir e far si guastano scarpe assai. _Between saying and doing many
a pair of shoes is worn out._

Fra galantuomini parola è istrumento. _Among men of honour a word is a
bond._

Fra gli amici guardami Iddio, che fra’ nemici mi guarderò io. _God keep
me from my friends, from my enemies I will keep myself._

Frà Modesto non fu mai priore. _Friar Modest never was a prior._

Freno indorato non megliora il cavallo. _A golden bit makes none the
better horse._


G.

Gatta inguantata non prese mai topo. _A muffled cat is no good mouser._

Gatto rinchiuso doventa leone. _A cat pent up becomes a lion._

Gente di confini, o ladri o assassini. _Borderers are either thieves or
murderers._

Gettar la fune dietro la secchia. _To throw the rope after the bucket._

Gettar le margherite ai porci. _To cast pearls before swine._

Gli alberi grandi fanno più ombra che frutto. _Large trees give more
shade than fruit._

Gli errori del medico gli copre la terra. _The earth covers the errors
of the physician._

Gl’Italiani saggi innanzi il fatto, i Tedeschi nel fatto, i Francesi
dopo il fatto. _The Italians are wise before the act, the Germans in
the act, the French after the act._

Gli onori mutano i costumi. _Honours change manners._

Gli stornelli son magri perchè vanno in frotta. _Starlings are lean
because they go in flocks._

Gli uomini alla moderna, e gli asini all’antica. _Men after the modern
fashion, and asses after the ancient._

Gli uomini fanno la roba, e le donne la conservano. _Men make wealth,
and women preserve it._

Gli uomini hanno gli anni ch’e’ sentono, e le donne quelli che
mostrano. _Men are as old as they feel, and women as they look._

Gola d’adulatori, sepolcro aperto. _The flatterer’s throat is an open
sepulchre._

Granata nuova spazza ben la casa. _New brooms sweep clean._

Granata nuova, tre dì buona. _A new broom is good for three days._

Gran chiesa e poca divozione. _A great church and little devotion._

Gran fumo, poco arrosto. _Great smoke, little roast._

Grassa cucina, magro testamento. _A fat kitchen, a lean testament._

Guarda che tu non lasci la coda nell’uscio. _Take care you don’t let
your tail be caught in the door._

Guarda innanzi che tu salti. _Look before you leap._

Guardatevi dal “Se io avessi sospettato.” _Beware of “Had I but known.”_

Guardati da aceto di vin dolce. _Beware of the vinegar of sweet wine._

Guardati da alchimista povero. _Beware of a poor alchemist._

Guardati da chi non ha che perdere. _Beware of one who has nothing to
lose._

Guardati dall’occasione, e ti guarderà Dio da’ peccati. _Keep yourself
from opportunities and God will keep you from sins._

Guerra cominciata, inferno scatenato. _War begun, hell unchained._


I.

I bocconi grossi spesso strozzano. _Big mouthfuls often choke._

I buoni nuotatori alfin s’affogano. _Good swimmers are drowned at
last._

I cani abbaiano a chi non conoscono. _Dogs bark at those they don’t
know._

I cenni de’ padroni sono commandamenti. _Masters’ hints are commands._

I colpi non si danno a patti. _Blows are not given upon conditions._

I danari del comune sono come l’acqua benedetta, ognun ne piglia.
_Public money is like holy water, every one helps himself to it._

I danari sono tondi, e girano. _Money is round, and rolls._

I frutti proibiti sono i più dolci. _Forbidden fruit is the sweetest._

I gran dolori sono muti. _Great griefs are mute._

Il bugiardo deve aver buona memoria. _Liars should have good memories._

Il buon marinaro si conosce al cattivo tempo. _The good seaman is known
in bad weather._

Il buono a qualcosa è l’asino del publico. _He that is good for
something is the ass of the public._

Il buono è buono, ma il miglior vince. _Good is good, but better beats
it._

Il buon pagatore dell’altrui borsa è signore. _He who pays well is
master of another’s purse._

Il buon pastore tosa, e non scortica. _The good shepherd shears, not
flays._

Il buon sangue giammai non può mentire. _Good blood never lies._

Il campanello di camera è il peggior suono che si possa avere negli
orecchi. _The chamber-bell (chamber-clapper, or curtain lecture) is the
worst sound one can have in his ears._

Il can battuto dal bastone, ha paura dell’ombra. _The dog that has been
beaten with a stick is afraid of its shadow._

Il can che vuol mordere, non abbaia. _The dog that means to bite don’t
bark._

Il cane scottato dall’acqua calda, ha paura della fredda. _The scalded
dog fears cold water._

Il cieco non dee giudicar dei colori. _A blind man is no judge of
colours._

Il danaro è fratello del danaro. _Money is money’s brother._

Il danaro è un compendio del poter umano. _Money is an epitome of human
power._

Il diavolo dove non può mettere il capo vi mette la coda. _Where the
devil cannot put his head he puts his tail._

Il diavolo è cattivo, perchè è vecchio. _The devil is bad because he is
old._

Il diavolo non è cosi brutto come si dipinge. _The devil is not so ugly
as he is painted._

Il diavolo, quand’è vecchio, si fa romito. _When the devil is old he
turns hermit._

Il diavolo tenta tutti, ma l’ozioso tenta il diavolo. _The devil tempts
all, but the idle man tempts the devil._

Il diavolo vuol tentar Lucifero. _The devil will tempt Lucifer._

Il domandar costa poco. _Asking costs little._

Il fatto non si può disfare. _What’s done can’t be undone._

Il fin del corsare è annegare. _The end of the corsair is to drown._

Il fin loda l’opera. _The end praises the work._

Il fiume non s’ingrossa d’acqua chiara. _The river does not swell with
clear water._

Il fuoco fa saltar le vespe fuor del vespaio. _Fire drives the wasp out
of its nest._

Il fuoco non s’estingue con fuoco. _Fire is not quenched with fire._

Il leone ebbe bisogno del topo. _The lion had need of the mouse._

Il lungo giorno nò, ma il cuor fa l’opera. _It is not the long day, but
the heart that does the work._

Il lupo non è sempre lupo. _The wolf is not always a wolf._

Il lupo piange la pecora, poi se la mangia. _The wolf bemoans the
sheep, and then eats it._

Il male per libra viene, va via per once. _Ill luck comes by pounds and
goes away by ounces._

Il mangiare insegna a bere. _Eating teaches drinking._

Il medico pietoso fa la piaga puzzolente. _The tender surgeon makes the
wound gangrene._

Il meglio è nemico del bene. _Better is an enemy to well._

Il migliore è meno caro. _The best is the cheapest._

Il mirto è sempre mirto, benchè sia tra l’ortiche. _The myrtle is
always a myrtle, though it be among nettles._

Il molino non macina senz’acqua. _The mill does not grind without
water._

Il mondo è dei flemmatici. _The world belongs to the phlegmatic._

Il mondo è di chi ha pazienza. _The world is for him who has patience._

Il mondo è fatto a scale, chi le scende e chi le sale. _The world is
like a staircase; some go up, others go down._

Il mondo sta con tre cose: fare, disfare, e dare ad intendere. _The
world wags on with three things: doing, undoing, and pretending._

Il mortaio sa sempre d’aglio. _The mortar always smells of garlic._

Il nemico ti fa savio. _Your enemy makes you wise._

Il pane degli altri è troppo salato. _Others’ bread is too salt._

Il pane degli altri ha sette croste. _Others’ bread has seven crusts._

Il pane mangiato è presto dimenticato. _Eaten bread is soon forgotten._

Il parer proprio non ha mai torto. _A man’s own opinion is never wrong._

Il pesce grande mangia il picciolo. _The big fish eat the little._

Il più difficile è il metter il piè in istaffa. _The difficult thing is
to get foot in the stirrup._

Il più duro passo è quello della soglia. _The hardest step is that over
the threshold._

Il più forte ha sempre ragione. _The strongest is always in the right._

Il primier colpo per due colpi vale. _The first blow is as good as two._

Il riso fa buon sangue. _Laughter makes good blood._

Il sacco de’ mendici non ha fondo. _The beggar’s wallet has no bottom._

Il sangue del soldato fa grande il capitano. _The soldier’s blood
exalts the captain._

Il satollo non crede al digiuno. _The well-fed man does not believe in
hunger._

Il secondo pensiero è il migliore. _Second thoughts are best._

Il soldato per far male è ben pagato. _The soldier is well paid for
doing mischief._

Il tempo buono viene una volta sola. _The good time comes but once._

Il tempo è una lima sorda. _Time is an inaudible file._

I lupi non si mangiano l’un l’altro. _Wolves do not eat each other._

Il veleno si spegne col veleno. _Poison quells poison._

I matrimonj sono, non come si fanno, ma come riescono. _Marriages are
not as they are made, but as they turn out._

I matti fanno le feste, ed i savj le godono. _Fools make feasts, and
wise men eat them._

I migliori alberi sono i più battuti. _The best trees are the most
beaten._

I mosconi rompon le tele de’ ragni. _Big flies break the spider’s web._

In bocca chiusa non cade pera. _No pear falls into a shut mouth._

In bocca chiusa non c’entran mosche. _No flies get into a shut mouth._

In cammino battuto erba non cresce. _No grass grows on a beaten road._

In casa, Argo; di fuori, talpa. _Argus at home, a mole abroad._

Indarno si tende la rete in vista degli uccelli. _It is in vain to lay
a net in sight of the birds._

In guaina d’oro coltello di piombo. _In a golden sheath a leaden knife._

In lungo viaggio, anche una paglia pesa. _On a long journey even a
straw is heavy._

In picciol tempo passa ogni gran pioggia. _A heavy shower is soon over._

In quella casa è poca pace ove la gallina canta, ed il gallo tace.
_There is little peace in that house where the hen crows and the cock
is mute._

Insegnando s’impara. _We learn by teaching._

In tempo di guerra ogni cavallo ha soldo. _In war time there is pay for
every horse._

In terra di ciechi beato chi ha un occhio. _In the country of the blind
blessed is he that hath one eye._

In un giorno non si fe’ Roma. _Rome was not built in a day._

Invano si pesca, se l’amo non ha esca. _It is vain to fish if the hook
is not baited._

I paragoni son tutti odiosi. _Comparisons are odious._

I pazzi crescono senza innaffiarli. _Fools grow without watering._

I pazzi per lettera sono i maggiori pazzi. _There is no fool like a
learned fool._

I piccioli ladri s’impiccano per la gola, i grossi per la borsa.
_Little thieves are hanged by the neck, great ones by the purse._

I principi hanno le braccia lunghe. _Princes have long arms._

I salici son deboli, e pur legano le legne più grosse. _Willows are
weak, yet serve to bind bigger wood._


L.

La barba non fa il filosofo. _The beard does not make the philosopher._

L’abito è una seconda natura. _Custom is second nature._

L’abito non fa il monaco. _The gown does not make the friar._

La bonaccia burrasca minaccia. _A calm portends a storm._

La borsa degli amanti va legata con fil di ragno. _Lovers’ purses are
tied with cobwebs._

La botte non può dare se non del vino ch’ella ha. _The cask can give no
other wine than that it contains._

La botte piena non fa rumore. _The full cask makes no noise._

La buona fama è come il cipresso: una volta tagliato non rinverdisce
più. _Good repute is like the cypress: once cut, it never puts forth
leaf again._

La buona roba non fu mai cara. _Good ware was never dear._

La carta non diventa rossa. _Paper does not blush._

La chiave d’oro apre ogni porta. _The golden key opens every door._

La coda sempre è la più cattiva da scorticare. _The tail is always the
hardest part to flay._

La commodità fa l’uomo ladro. _Opportunity makes the thief._

La coscienza vale per mille testimonj. _Conscience is as good as a
thousand witnesses._

La diritta è serva della mancina. _The right hand is slave to the left._

La donna all’improvviso, e l’uomo a caso pensato. _Woman (decides),
impromptu; man, on reflection._

La fame caccia il lupo del bosco. _Hunger drives the wolf out of the
wood._

La fame è il meglior intingolo. _Hunger is the best sauce._

La fame muta le fave in mandole. _Hunger transmutes beans into almonds._

La forca è fatta per i disgraziati. _The gallows was made for the
unlucky._

La fortuna aiuta i pazzi. _Fortune helps fools._

La fuga del nemico abbi sospetta. _Look with suspicion on the flight of
an enemy._

La gatta vorrebbe mangiar pesci, ma non pescare. _The cat loves fish,
but is loth to wet her feet._

Lagrime di donna, fontana di malizia. _Women’s tears are a fountain of
craft._

La guerra fa i ladri, e la pace gl’impicca. _War makes robbers, and
peace hangs them._

La luna non cura dell’abbaiar de’ cani. _The moon does not heed the
baying of dogs._

La madre pietosa fa la figliuola tignosa. _A tender-hearted mother
makes a scabby daughter._

La mal erba cresce presto. _Ill weeds grow apace._

L’amicizia si de’ sdruscire, non istracciare. _Friendship should be
unpicked, not rent._

L’amico non è conosciuto finchè non è perduto. _A friend is not known
till he is lost._

L’ammalato dorme quando il debitor non dorme. _The sick man sleeps when
the debtor cannot._

La moglie e il ronzino piglia dal vicino. _For a wife and a horse go to
your neighbour._

La mosca che punge la tartaruga si rompe il becco. _The fly that bites
the tortoise breaks its beak._

La mosca ha la sua milza. _Even a fly has its spleen._

La nave non va senza il battello. _The ship does not go without the
boat._

La necessità torna in volontà. _Necessity becomes will._

La nobiltà è una povera vivanda in tavola. _High birth is a poor dish
on the table._

La padella dice al paiuolo: Fatti in là, che tu mi tigni. _The pan says
to the pot: Keep off, or you’ll smutch me._

La parola non è mal detta, se non è mal presa. _Nothing is ill said if
it is not ill taken._

La paura guarda la vigna. _Fear guards the vineyard._

La pelle d’asino è usa al bastone. _The ass’s hide is used to the
stick._

La più lunga strada è la più prossima a casa. _The longest way round is
the shortest way home._

La porta di dietro è quella che ruba la casa. _The back door is the one
that robs the house._

La prima scodella piace ad ognuno. _The first dish pleases every one._

La Quaresima che par così lunga, alla tavola d’altri poco dura. _Lent,
which seems so long, is short at other men’s tables._

L’aquila non fa guerra ai ranocchi. _The eagle does not war against
frogs._

La rana non morde perchè non può. _The frog does not bite because it
cannot._

L’armi de’ poltroni non tagliano, nè forano. _Cowards’ weapons neither
cut nor pierce._

L’armi portan pace. _Arms carry peace._

La roba non è di chi la fa, ma di chi la gode. _Wealth is not his who
makes it, but his who enjoys it._

Lascia la burla quando più piace. _Drop the jest when it is most
amusing._

La scusa non richiesta presuppone errore. _An unasked for excuse infers
transgression._

L’asino non conosce la coda, se non quando non l’ha più. _The ass does
not know the worth of his tail till he has lost it._

La superbia andò a cavallo, e tornò a piedi. _Pride went out on
horseback, and returned on foot._

La veste bianca non fa molinaro. _The white coat does not make the
miller._

La vita de’ medici, l’anima de’ preti, e la roba de’ legisti sono in
gran pericolo. _The lives of doctors, the souls of priests, and the
property of lawyers, are in great danger._

La volontà è tutto. _The will is everything._

La volpe consiglia le altre a tagliarsi la coda, per aver lasciata la
propria al laccio. _The fox advised the others to cut off their tails,
because he had left his own in the trap._

La volpe dice che l’uva è agresta. _The fox said the grapes were sour._

Le amicizie son a buon conto quando si comprano a sberrettate.
_Friendships are cheap when they can he bought by doffing the hat._

Le bestemmie fanno come le processioni: ritornano donde partirono.
_Curses are like processions: they return to whence they set out._

Le buone derrate vuotano la borsa. _Good bargains empty the purse._

Le cattive nuove sono le prime. _Bad news is the first to come._

Le cose non sono come sono, ma come si vedono. _Things are not as they
are, but as they are regarded._

Le disgrazie non vengon mai sole. _Misfortunes never come single._

Le donne dicono sempre il vero, ma non lo dicono tutto intero. _Women
always speak the truth, but not the whole truth._

Le donne sanno un punto più del diavolo. _Women know a point more than
the devil._

Le donne si fanno rosse per non arrossire. _Women rouge that they may
not blush._

Le feste sono belle a casa d’altri. _’Tis good feasting in other men’s
houses._

Legami mani e piei, e gettami tra’ miei. _Tie me hand and foot and
throw me among my own people._

Le insalate pazze, le fanno i savj. _When wise men play mad pranks they
do it with a vengeance._

L’elefante non sente il morso della pulce. _The elephant does not feel
a flea-bite._

Le leggi sono fatte pei tristi. _Laws were made for rogues._

Le lucciole non sono lanterne. _Glowworms are not lanterns._

Le minacce son arme del minacciato. _Threats are arms for the
threatened._

Le parole non pascono i gatti. _Words won’t feed cats._

Le parole son femmine, e i fatti son maschi. _Words are female, deeds
are male._

Le piccole spese son quelle che vuotano la borsa. _It is the petty
expenses that empty the purse._

Le rose cascano, e le spine rimangono. _The roses fall, and the thorns
remain._

Le secchie si mettono a combattere col pozzo, e ne portano la testa
rotta. _The buckets take to fighting with the well, and get their heads
broken._

Le siepi non hanno occhi, ma orecchie. _Hedges have no eyes, but they
have ears._

Le vesti degli avvocati sono foderate dell’ostinazion dei litiganti.
_Lawyers’ robes are lined with the obstinacy of suitors._

L’hai tolta bella? Tuo danno. _You have married a beauty? So much the
worse for you._

L’indugiare è pericoloso. _Delays are dangerous._

L’infermo ha libertà di dire il tutto. _The sick man is free to say
all._

L’Inglese italianizzato, un diavolo incarnato. _The Italianised
Englishman is a devil incarnate._

L’occhio del padrone ingrassa il cavallo. _The eye of the master
fattens the horse._

Loda il mar, e tienti alla terra. _Praise the sea and keep on land._

Lontano dagli occhi, lontano dal cuore. _Far from the eyes, far from
the heart._

L’oro non compra tutto. _Gold does not buy everything._

Lo sparagno è il primo guadagno. _Savings are the first gain._

L’ospite, ed il pesce dopo tre dì rincresce. _A guest and a fish stink
in three days._

L’ultimo vestito ce lo fanno senza tasche. _Our last garment is made
without pockets._

Lunga lingua, corta mano. _Long tongue, short hand._

Lupo non mangia lupo. _Wolves don’t eat wolves._


M.

Mai si fa cosa ben in fretta, che il fuggir la peste e i rumori, e
pigliar pulci. _Nothing is ever well done in a hurry, except flying
from the plague or from quarrels, and catching fleas._

Mai si serra una porta, che non si apra un’altra. _One door never shuts
but another opens._

Male in vacche, e peggio in buoi. _Ill in kine and worse in beeves._

Mangiando viene l’appetito. _Appetite comes in eating._

Mangia tanto una rozza quanto un buon cavallo. _A jade eats as much as
a good horse._

Matta è quella pecora che si confessa al lupo. _’Tis a silly sheep that
confesses to the wolf._

Medico, cura te stesso. _Physician, heal thyself._

Meglio è aver il marito senza amore che con gelosia. _It is better to
have a husband without love than jealous._

Meglio è poco che niente. _Better aught than nought._

Meglio tardi che mai. _Better late than never._

Meglio un prossimo vicino che un lontano cugino. _Better a near
neighbour than a distant cousin._

Mentre l’erba cresce il cavallo muore di fame. _Whilst the grass grows
the steed starves._

Mettersi prima il giuppone che la camicia. _To put on one’s doublet
before one’s shirt._ (_To put the cart before the horse._)

Mille verisimili non fanno un vero. _A thousand probabilities do not
make one truth._

Misura tre volte, e taglia una. _Measure three times and cut once._

Molti si fan scrupolo di sputare in chiesa, e poi inbrattano l’altare.
_Many scruple to spit in church, and afterwards defile the altar._

Molti son bravi quando l’inimico fugge. _Many are brave when the enemy
flies._

Molti voglion l’albero che fingon di rifiutar il frutto. _Many desire
the tree who pretend to refuse the fruit._

Molto fumo, e poco arrosto. _Much smoke, and little roast._

Monaco vagabondo non disse mai lode del suo monastero. _A vagabond monk
never spoke well of his convent._

Morso di pecora non passa mai la pelle. _A sheep’s bite is never more
than skin deep._

Morta la bestia, morto il veleno. _The beast once dead, the venom is
dead._

Morto io, morto ognun, ed il porco. _When I’m dead, everybody’s dead,
and the pig too._

Muove la coda il cane, non per te, ma per il pane. _The dog wags his
tail, not for you, but for bread._

Muraglia bianca, carta di matto. _A white wall is the fool’s paper._


N.

N’ammazza più la gola che la spada. _Gluttony kills more than the
sword._

Natale non viene che una volta l’anno. _Christmas comes but once a
year._

Necessità non ha legge. _Necessity has no law._

Nè donna, nè tela a lume di candela. _Neither women nor linen by
candlelight._

Nei piccioli sacchi sono le migliori spezie. _The best spices are in
small bags._

Nella coda sta il veleno. _The venom is in the tail._

Nella guerra d’amor vince chi fugge. _In the war of love who flies
conquers._

Nella prosperità non fumano gli altari. _In prosperity no altars smoke._

Nella veste più fina fa maggior danno la tarmina. _The moth does most
mischief to the finest garment._

Nella zuffa il debole è forte. _In the fray the weak are strong._

Nessun buon avvocato piatisce mai. _No good lawyer ever goes to law
himself._

Nessun buon medico piglia mai medicine. _No good doctor ever takes
physic._

Nessun diventò mai povero per far limosina. _No one ever became poor
through giving alms._

Nessuno si pentì mai d’aver taciuto. _No one ever repented of having
held his tongue._

Nessun sente da che parte preme la scarpa, se non chi se la calza. _No
one perceives where the shoe pinches but he who wears it._

Niuna maraviglia dura più che tre giorni. _No wonder lasts more than
three days._

Non basta di saper rubare, bisogna anche saper nascondere. _It is not
enough to know how to steal, one must know also how to conceal._

Non bisogna fasciarsi il capo prima di romperselo. _There is no need to
bind up one’s head before it is broken._

Non bisogna ripescare tutte le secchie che cascano. _It is not
necessary to fish up every bucket that falls into the well._

Non c’è amor senza gelosia. _There is no love without jealousy._

Non c’è il peggior frutto di quello che non matura mai. _There is no
worse fruit than that which never ripens._

Non ci è fumo senza fuoco. _There’s no smoke without fire._

Non ci è il più cattivo sordo di quel che non vuol udire. _None so deaf
as he that will not hear._

Non ci è la peggior burla che la vera. _There is no worse joke than a
true one._

Non credere al santo se non fa miracoli. _Don’t believe in the saint
unless he works miracles._

Non dar del pane al cane ogni volta che dimena la coda. _Do not give
the dog bread every time he wags his tail._

Non darebbe il coltello al diavolo per scannarsi. _He would not give
the devil a knife to cut his throat._

Non dir mal dell’anno finchè passato non sia. _Speak not ill of the
year until it is past._

Non è bello quel che è bello, ma quel che piace. _Handsome is not what
is handsome, but what pleases._

Non è buon murator chi rifiuta pietra alcuna. _He is not a good mason
who refuses any stone._

Non è in alcun luogo chi è per tutto. _He is in no place who is
everywhere._

Non entra a messa la campana, e pur ognuno ci chiama. _The bell does
not go to mass, and yet calls every one to it._

Non è onore all’aquila il vincer la colomba. _It is no honour for an
eagle to vanquish a dove._

Non è scappato chi si strascina la catena dietro. _He is not free who
drags his chain after him._

Non è tempo da giuocar a scacchi quando la casa brucia. _It is no time
to play chess when the house is on fire._

Non è tutto butiro che fa la vacca. _All is not butter that comes from
the cow._

Non è uomo chi non sa dir di nò. _He is not a man who cannot say no._

Non si fa ber l’asino quando non ha sete. _There’s no making the ass
drink when he is not thirsty._

Non fu mai cacciator gatto che miagola. _Never was a mewing cat a good
mouser._

Non fu mai così bella scarpa che non diventasse brutta ciabatta. _There
never was a shoe however handsome that did not become an ugly slipper._

Non fu mai sacco sì pieno che non v’entrasse ancor un grano. _A sack
was never so full but it could hold another grain._

Non fu mai vista capra morta di fame. _No one ever saw a goat dead of
hunger._

Non giova a dire, per tal via non passerò, nè di tal acqua beverò.
_There is no use in saying, I will not go such a way, nor drink of such
a water._

Non giudicar la nave stando in terra. _Do not judge of the ship from
the land._

Non gridar i pesci fritti prima d’esser presi. _Don’t cry fried fish
before they are caught._

Non istanno bene due galli in un cortile. _Two cocks in one yard do not
agree._

Non ischerzar coll’orso, se non vuoi esser morso. _Don’t play with the
bear if you don’t want to be bit._

Non lasciar chiodo che non si ributti. _Leave no nail unclenched._

Non mi dir oliva prima che mi vedi colta. _Call me not olive before you
see me gathered._

Non mi punse mai scorpione che io non mi medicassi col suo olio. _A
scorpion never stung me but I cured myself with its grease._

Non mordere se non sai se è pietra o pane. _Don’t bite till you know
whether it is bread or a stone._

Non mostrar mai nè il fondo della tua borsa, nè del tuo animo. _Never
let the bottom of your purse or of your mind be seen._

Non ogni fiore fa buon odore. _It is not every flower that smells
sweet._

Non ogni giorno è festa. _Every day is not a holiday._

Non ogni parola vuol risposta. _Not every word requires an answer._

Non pensa il cor tutto quel che dice la bocca. _The heart does not
think all the mouth says._

Non pianse mai uno che non ridesse un altro. _One never wept but
another laughed._

Non puoi mal fare a nave rotta. _You cannot damage a wrecked ship._

Non può uscir del sacco se non quel che ci è. _Nothing can come out of
a sack but what is in it._

Non resta mai carne in beccheria per trista ch’ella sia. _No meat ever
remains in the shambles however bad it may be._

Non ricordare la croce al diavolo. _Don’t mention the cross to the
devil._

Non ricordar il capestro in casa dell’impiccato. _Never speak of a rope
in the house of one who was hanged._

Non ride sempre la moglie del ladro. _The thief’s wife does not always
laugh._

Non scortica la lingua il parlar dolce. _Smooth words do not flay the
tongue._

Non si crede al santo se non fa miracoli. _The saint has no believers
unless he works miracles._

Non si deve far male per trarne bene. _Never do evil that good may come
of it._

Non si dice mai tanto una cosa che non sia qualche cosa. _A thing is
never much talked of but there is some truth in it._

Non si fa mantello per un’acqua sola. _A cloak is not made for a single
shower of rain._

Non si offende mai cane gettandogli le ossa. _A dog is never offended
at being pelted with bones._

Non si può ad un tempo bere e fischiare. _One cannot drink and whistle
at the same time._

Non si può cavar sangue dalla rapa. _You cannot draw blood from a
turnip._

Non si può entrare in Paradiso a dispetto de’santi. _One can’t enter
Paradise in spite of the saints._

Non si può far andar un molino a vento co’ mantici. _There’s no turning
a windmill with a pair of bellows._

Non si serra mai una porta che non se n’apra un’altra. _One door never
shuts but another opens._

Non si va in Paradiso in carrozza. _There’s no getting to heaven in a
coach._

Non si vorria esser solo in Paradiso. _One would not be alone in
Paradise._

Non son tutti santi quelli che vanno in chiesa. _All are not saints who
go to church._

Non svegliare il can che dorme. _Wake not a sleeping dog._

Non ti metter in dito anello troppo stretto. _Don’t put too tight a
ring on your finger._

Non tuona mai che non piova. _It never thunders but it rains._

Non tutte le pecore sono per il lupo. _All the sheep are not for the
wolf._

Non tutti dormono quelli che hanno serrati gli occhi. _Not all are
asleep who have their eyes shut._

Non v’è barba al mondo così ben rasa, che un altro barbier non ci trovi
da radere. _There is no beard so well shaven but another barber will
find something more to shave from it._

Non vender la pelle dell’orso prima di pigliarlo. _Don’t sell the
bearskin before you have caught the bear._

Non v’è peggior burla della vera. _There’s no worse joke than a true
one._

Non v’è peggior ladro d’un cattivo libro. _There is no worse thief than
a bad book._

Non v’è rosa senza spina. _No rose without a thorn._

Non v’è sì tristo cane che non meni la coda. _There is no dog, be he
ever so wicked, but wags his tail._

Non vi è abbastanza se niente avanza. _There is never enough where
nought is left._

Non vien dì che non venga sera. _No day but has its evening._

Novella trista arriva presto. _Ill news comes apace._

Nulla nuova, buona nuova. _No news is good news._

Nuova rete non piglia uccello vecchio. _Old birds are not caught with
new nets._


O.

O bene o male, tutti dobbiamo vivere. _Good or bad we must all live._

Occhio che non vede, cuor che non duole. _What the eye sees not the
heart rues not._

Odi l’altra parte, e credi poco. _Hear the other side, and believe
little._

Odio ricominciato è peggio che prima. _Hatred renewed is worse than at
first._

Odi, vedi, e taci, se vuoi viver in pace. _Hear, see, and say nothing,
if you would live in peace._

Offerir molto è spezie di negare. _Extravagant offers are a kind of
denial._

Ogni acqua estingue il fuoco. _Any water will put out fire._

Ogni acqua va al mare. _All water runs to the sea._

Ogni bottega ha la sua malizia. _Every shop has its trick._ (_There are
tricks in all trades._)

Ogni cane è leone a casa sua. _Every dog is a lion at home._

Ogni cosa è d’ogni anno. _Everything is of every year._

Ogni cosa ha cagione. _There is a cause for all things._

Ogni cosa serve a qualche cosa. _Everything is good for something._

Ogni cosa si sopporta eccetto il buon tempo. _Everything may be borne
except good fortune._

Ogni cosa vuol principio. _Everything must have a beginning._

Ogni dieci anni un uomo ha bisogno dell’altro. _Every ten years one man
has need of another._

Ogni dì non è festa. _Every day is not a holiday._

Ogni disuguaglianza amore agguaglia. _Love levels all inequalities._

Ogni dì vien sera. _Every day has its night._

Ogni lucciola non è fuoco. _Every glowworm is not a fire._

Ogni medaglia ha il suo rovescio. _Every medal has its reverse._

Ogni monte ha la sua valle. _Every hill has its valley._

Ogni nave fa acqua: quale a mezzo, quale a proda, e quale in sentina.
_All ships leak: some amidships, some in the bows, some in the hold._

Ogni pazzo è savio quando tace. _Every fool is wise when he holds his
tongue._

Ogni pazzo vuol dar consiglio. _Every fool wants to give advice._

Ogni pignattaro loda la sua pignatta, e più quella che tiene rotta.
_Every potter praises his pot, and most of all the one that is
cracked._

Ogni promessa è debito. _Every promise is a debt._

Ogni rosa ha la sua spina. _Every rose has its thorn._

Ogni scusa è buona pur che vaglia. _Any excuse is good if it hold good._

Ogni tua guisa non sappia la tua camicia. _Let not your shirt know all
your thoughts._

Ogni uomo ha buona moglie e cattiva arte. _Every man has a good wife
and a bad trade._

Ogni vento non scuote il noce. _Every wind does not shake down the nut._

Ogni vero non è buono a dire. _Every truth is not good to be told._

Ogni vite vuole il suo palo. _Every vine must have its stake._

Ogni volpe abbia cura della sua coda. _Let every fox take care of his
own tail._

Ognun biasima il suo mestiere. _Every one finds fault with his own
trade._

Ognun crede di aver più cervello che non ha, e meno quattrini. _Every
one gives himself credit for more brains than he has, and less money._

Ognuno all’arte sua, e il bue all’aratro. _Every one to his own
calling, and the ox to the plough._

Ognuno ama la giustizia a casa altrui: a nessun piace a casa sua.
_Every one likes justice in another’s house, none in his own._

Ognuno loda il proprio santo. _Every one praises his own saint._

Ognuno sa dove la scarpa lo stringe. _Every one knows where his shoe
pinches him._

Ognuno si crede senza vizio, perchè non ha quelli degli altri. _Every
one thinks himself without sin because he has not those of others._

Ognun per sè, e Dio per tutti. _Every one for himself and God for us
all._

Ognun sa navigar per il buon tempo. _Every one can navigate in fine
weather._

Ognun si pari le mosche con la sua coda. _Let every one keep off the
flies with his own tail._

Ognun tira l’acqua al suo molino. _Every one draws the water to his own
mill._

Ognun va col suo sacco al molino. _Every one goes with his own sack to
the mill._

Ombra di signore, cappel di matto. _The shadow of a lord is a cap for a
fool._

Onor di bocca assai giova, e poco costa. _Lip courtesy pleases much and
costs little._

Oro è che oro vale. _That is gold which is worth gold._

Oro non è tutto quel che risplende. _All is not gold that glitters._

O sassi o pani, bisogna aver qualcosa in man pei cani. _Stones or
bread, one must have something in hand for the dogs._


P.

Pagar uno della sua moneta. _To pay one in his own coin._

Parente, o non parente, mal per quel che non ha niente. _Kin or no kin,
woe to him who has nothing._

Partoriscono i monti, e nasce un topo. _The mountains are in labour,
and bring forth a mouse._

Passa la festa, ed il matto resta. _The feast passes and the fool
remains._

Passato il fiume, è scordato il santo. _The river passed the saint
forgotten._

Passato il pericolo, gabbato il santo. _The danger past, the saint
cheated._

Passo a passo si va a Roma. _Step by step one goes to Rome._

Patto chiaro, amico caro. _A clear bargain, a dear friend._

Pazienza! disse il lupo all’asino. _Patience! said the wolf to the ass._

Pazzo chi perde il volo per lo sbalzo. _He is a fool who loses the
flight for the leap._

Pazzo è chi non sa da che parte vien il vento. _He is a fool who does
not know from what quarter the wind blows._

Pazzo è colui che di quattro cose si vanta: di buon vino, di buon
cavallo, di bella moglie, di danari assai. _He is a fool who boasts of
four things: that he has good wine, a good horse, a handsome wife, and
plenty of money._

Pazzo è quel prete che biasima le sue reliquie. _That priest is a fool
who decries his relics._

Peccato celato, mezzo perdonato. _A sin concealed is half forgiven._

Peccato confessato è mezzo perdonato. _A sin confessed is half
forgiven._

Pecora che bela perde il boccone. _The sheep that bleats loses a
mouthful._

Pecora mansueta da ogni agnello è tettata. _A mild sheep is sucked by
every lamb._

Peggio è la paura della guerra, che la guerra stessa. _The fear of war
is worse than war itself._

Pegno che mangia niuno lo pigli. _No one should take in an eating pawn
(or pledge)._

Pela la gazza, e non la far strillare. _Pluck the magpie, and don’t
make her scream._

Pensa molto, parla poco, e scrivi meno. _Think much, speak little, and
write less._

Pensano gl’innamorati cho gli altri siano ciechi. _Lovers think others
are blind._

Per amistà conservare, muri bisogna piantare. _To preserve friendship
one must build walls._

Perchè vada il carro, bisogna unger le ruote. _To make the cart go you
must grease the wheels._

Perde le lagrime chi piange avanti al giudice. _He wastes his tears who
weeps before the judge._

Per dir gran mercè, la mia gatta morì. _Thank you, pretty pussy, was
the death of my cat._

Per diventar ricco in questo mondo, non ci vuol altro che voltar le
spalle a Dio. _To become rich in this world, it needs only to turn
one’s back on God._

Per picciola cagione pigliasi il lupo il montone. _On very small
pretext the wolf seizes the sheep._

Per più strade si va a Roma. _There are many roads to Rome._

Per saper troppo, perdè la sua coda la volpe. _Through being too
knowing the fox lost his tail._

Per tutto sono de’ tristi e de’ buoni. _There are good and bad
everywhere._

Per un monaco non si lascia di far l’abbate. _The election of the abbot
is not stopped for want of a monk._

Per un orecchio entra, per l’altro esce. _In at one ear, out at the
other._

Piaga antiveduta assai men duole. _A wound foreseen pains the less._

Piaga per allentar d’arco non sana. _Unbending the bow does not cure
the wound._

Pian, barbiere, che l’acqua scotta. _Softly, barber, the water scalds._

Piano, che non si levi la polvere. _Softly, don’t raise a dust._

Piccola favilla accende gran fuoco. _A little spark kindles a great
fire._

Piccola pietra rovescia gran carro. _A little stone overturns a great
cart._

Piccola pioggia fa cessar gran vento. _Small rain lays a great wind._

Piega l’albero quando è giovane. _Bend the tree while it is young._

Pietra mossa non fa muschio. _A rolling stone gathers no moss._

Pigliamo prima l’orso, e poi vendiamo la pelle. _Let us first catch the
bear and then sell its skin._

Pigliar due colombi a una fava. _To catch two pigeons with one bean._

Pigliar la lepre col carro. _To catch a hare with a cart._

Pignatta rotta non cade mai da uncino. _A cracked pot never fell off
the hook._

Più che il martello dura l’incudine. _The anvil lasts longer than the
hammer._

Più lungo d’un dì senza pane. _Longer than a day without bread._

Più mi tocca la camicia che la gonnella. _Near is my petticoat, but
nearer is my smock._

Più ombra che frutto fanno gli arberi grandi. _Large trees give more
shade than fruit._

Più pazzi che quei da Zago, che davan del letame al campanile perchè
crescesse. _Greater fools than they of Zago, who dunged the steeple to
make it grow._

Più sa il matto in casa sua che, il savio in casa d’altri. _The fool
knows more in his own house than the sage in other men’s._

Più son i minacciati che gli uccisi. _There are more threatened than
slain._

Più spegne una buona parola, che un secchio d’acqua. _One good word
quenches more heat than a bucket of water._

Più sventurato che i cani in chiesa. _More unlucky than dogs in church._

Più tosto si arriva un bugiardo, che uno zoppo. _A liar is sooner
caught than a cripple._

Piuttosto cappello in mano, che mano alla borsa. _Rather hat in hand
than hand in purse._

Piuttosto un asino che porti, che un cavallo che butti in terra.
_Rather an ass that carries than a horse that throws._

Più vale guadagnar in loto, che perder in oro. _Better gain in mud than
lose in gold._

Più vale il fumo di casa mia, che il fuoco dell’altrui. _The smoke of
my own house is better than another man’s fire._

Più vede un occhio del padrone che quattro del servitore. _One eye of
the master sees more than four eyes of his servants._

Placato il cane, il rubar è facile. _It is easy robbing when the dog is
quieted._

Poco fiele fa amaro molto miele. _A little gall makes a great deal of
honey bitter._

Poichè la casa brucia, io mi scalderò. _Since the house is on fire I
will warm myself at the blaze._

Porco pigro non mangia pere mature. _The lazy pig does not eat ripe
pears._

Povero come un topo di chiesa. _As poor as a church mouse._

Povertà non ha parenti. _Poverty has no kin._

Prega il villano, il mercato è disfatto. _Entreat the churl and the
bargain is broken off._

Preso il partito, cassato l’affanno. _Once resolved, the trouble is
over._

Presto e bene non si conviene. _Quick and well don’t agree._

Preti, frati, monache e polli non si trovan mai satolli. _Priests,
friars, nuns, and chickens never have enough._

Prometter più carri che buoi. _To promise more carts than oxen._

Protestare e dare del capo nel muro, lo può fare ognuno. _To protest
and knock one’s head against the wall is what everybody can do._

Provocar il cavallo a correr per il piano. _To spur a horse on level
ground._


Q.

Qual è l’amante, tal è l’amata. _As is the lover so is the beloved._

Qual figlia vuoi, tal moglie piglia. _As you would have a daughter so
choose a wife._

Quando Dio non vuole, i santi non possono. _When God will not the
saints cannot._

Quando è poco pan in tavola, mettine assai nella scodella. _When there
is little bread at table put plenty on your plate._

Quando i furbi vanno in processione, il diavolo porta la croce. _When
rogues go in procession the devil carries the cross._

Quando il leone è morto, le lepri gli saltano addosso. _When the lion
is dead the hares jump upon his carcase._

Quando il sole ti splende, non ti dèi curar della luna. _When the sun
shines on thee, thou needest not care for the moon._

Quando il tuo diavol nacque, il mio andava a scuola. _When your devil
was born, mine was going to school._

Quando i molinari fanno romore, tu lega i sacchi. _When the millers are
making an uproar, do you tie up your sacks._

Quando la cosa va bene, è buono dar consiglio. _It is easy to give
advice when all goes well._

Quando la donna regna, il diavolo governa. _When woman reigns the devil
governs._

Quando la gatta non è in paese, i topi ballano. _When the cat’s away
the rats dance._

Quando la gatta non v’è, i sorci ballano. _When the cat’s away the mice
dance._

Quando la pera è matura, convien ch’ella caggia. _When the pear is ripe
it must fall._

Quando la volpe predica, guardatevi, galline. _When the fox preaches,
take care of yourselves, hens._

Quando l’incendio è nel vicinato, porta l’acqua a casa tua. _When there
is a fire in the neighbourhood carry water to your own house._

Quando non c’è, perde la chiesa. _When there is nothing the church
loses._

Quando puoi aver del bene, pigliane. _Never refuse a good offer._

Quando tuona, il ladro divien uomo dabbene. _When it thunders, the
thief becomes honest._

Quando tutti ti dicono briaco, va a dormire. _When everybody says you
are drunk, go to sleep._

Quando tu vedi il lupo, non ne cercar le pedate. _When you see the
wolf, do not look for his track._

Quando viene la fortuna, apri le porte. _When fortune comes, open your
doors._

Quanto più la volpe è maladetta, tanto maggior preda fa. _The more the
fox is cursed, the more prey he catches._

Quanto più si frega la schiena al gatto, più leva la coda. _The more
you stroke the cat’s back the more she sets up her tail._

Quattrini e amicizia rompon le braccia alla giustizia. _Money and
friendship break the arms of justice._

Quattrino risparmiato, due volte guadagnato. _A farthing saved is twice
earned._

Quel che è fatto non si può disfare. _What’s done can’t be undone._

Quel che fa il pazzo all’ultimo, lo fa il savio alla prima. _A wise man
does at first what a fool must do at last._

Quel che non ammazza, ingrassa. _What does not poison, fattens._

Quel che non è stato, può essere. _What has not been, may be._

Quel che non puoi aver, biasima. _What you can’t have, abuse._

Quel che pare burla, ben sovente è vero. _Many a true word is spoken in
jest._

Quel che ripara il freddo, ripara il caldo. _What keeps out the cold
keeps out the heat._

Quello che costa poco, si stima meno. _What costs little is little
esteemed._

Quello è dolce a ricordare, che fu duro a sopportare. _That is pleasant
to remember which was hard to endure._


R.

Ragazzi savj e vecchi matti non furon mai buoni a nulla. _Wise lads and
old fools were never good for anything._

Ragghio d’asino non arriva al cielo. _The braying of an ass does not
reach heaven._

Rete nuova non piglia uccello vecchio. _A new net won’t catch an old
bird._

Ride bene chi ride l’ultimo. _He laughs well who laughs last._

Ritornan molti dalla guerra che non sanno raccontar la battaglia. _Many
return from the war who cannot give an account of the battle._

Romper la casa per vender il calcinaccio. _To pull down the house for
the sake of the mortar._

Rompe una pietra una goccia d’acqua. _A drop of water breaks a stone._

Rotta la testa, si mette la celata. _When his head is broken he puts on
his helmet._

Rubar il porco, e darne i piedi per l’amor di Dio. _To steal the pig,
and give away the pettitoes for God’s sake._


S.

Sacco pieno rizza l’orecchio. _A full sack pricks up its ear._

Sacco rotto non tien miglio, il pover uom non va a consiglio. _A ragged
sack holds no grain, a poor man is not taken into counsel._

Sacco vuoto non sta ritto. _An empty sack won’t stand upright._

Sa dove il diavolo tien la coda. _He knows where the devil has his
tail._

Sa meglio i fatti suoi un matto, che un savio quei degli altri. _A fool
knows his own business better than a wise man knows that of others._

San Francesco prima si faceva la barba per sè, poi la faceva a’ suoi
frati. _St. Francis shaved himself first, and then he shaved his
brethren._

Sanità senza quattrini è mezza malattia. _Health without money is a
half-malady._

S’annegherebbe in un cucchiar d’acqua. _He would drown in a spoonful of
water._

Sanno più un savio ed un matto, che un savio solo. _A wise man and a
fool together, know more than a wise man alone._

Sa più il papa e un contadino che il papa solo. _The pope and a peasant
know more than the pope alone._

Savie all’impensata, alla pensata pazze son le donne. _Women are wise
impromptu, fools on reflection._

Savio è colui che impara a spese altrui. _He is wise who learns at
another’s cost._

Schiaffo minacciato non è mai ben dato. _A threatened buffet is never
well given._

Sciocco è chi pensa che un altro non pensi. _He is a fool who thinks
that another does not think._

Scoprire un altare per ricoprirne un altro. _To strip one altar to
cover another._

Scorticar il cane scorticato. _To flay the flayed dog._

Sdegno cresce amore. _Anger increases love._

Sdegno d’amante poco dura. _A lover’s anger is short-lived._

Se ben ho perso l’anello, ho pur anche le dita. _If I have lost the
ring I still have the fingers._

Segreto confidato non è più segreto. _A secret imparted is no longer a
secret._

Se il giovane sapesse, se il vecchio potesse, e’ non c’è cosa che non
si facesse. _If the young man knew, if the old man could, there is
nothing but would be done._

Se io andassi al mare, lo troverei secco. _If I went to sea I should
find it dry._

Se la moglie pecca, non è il marito innocente. _If the wife sins the
husband is not innocent._

Se la superbia fosse arte, quanti dottori avremmo. _If pride were an
art, how many doctors we should have._

Se ’l sol mi splende, non curo la luna. _If the sun shines on me I care
not for the moon._

Sempre ha torto il più debole. _The weakest goes to the wall._

Sempre ne va il meglio. _The best always goes first._

Se non puoi mordere, non mostrar mai i denti. _If you can’t bite, don’t
show your teeth._

Senza debiti, senza pensieri. _Without debt without care._

Se piovesser maccheroni, che bel tempo pei ghiottoni! _If it rained
maccaroni, what a fine time for gluttons!_

Servizio de’ grandi non è eredità. _Service is not inheritance._

Se sorcio sei, non seguitar rane. _If you are a mouse don’t follow
frogs._

Se tacesse la gallina, non si saprebbe che ha fatto l’uovo. _If the hen
had not cackled we should not know she had laid an egg._

Se ti lasci metter in spalla il vitello, quindi a poco ti metteranno la
vacca. _If you let them put the calf on your shoulders, it will not be
long before they clap on the cow._

Si arriva più presto un bugiardo che un zoppo. _A liar is sooner caught
than a cripple._

Si dice è mentitore. _They say, is a liar._

Si dice sempre il lupo più grande che non è. _The wolf is always said
to be bigger than he is._

Simili con simili vanno. _Like will to like._

S’io dormo, dormo a me; s’io lavoro, non so a che. _If I sleep, I sleep
for myself; if I work, I know not for whom._

Si può pagar l’oro troppo caro. _One may buy gold too dear._

Si romperebbe il collo in un filo di paglia. _He would break his neck
against a straw._

Si trovano molti asini che non portano mai sacco. _There are more asses
than carry sacks._

Si trovano più ladri che forche. _There are more thieves than gibbets._

Si vive bene all’ombra del campanile. _It is good living under the
shadow of the belfry._

Sorte, e dormi. _Have luck, and sleep._

Sotto la bianca cenere sta la brace ardente. _Under white ashes there
is glowing coal._

Sotto l’istesso fuoco si purifica l’oro, e si consuma la paglia. _The
same fire purifies gold and consumes straw._

Spegner il fuoco con la stoppa. _To put out the fire with tow._

Spesso chi crede fuggir il fumo, cade nel fuoco. _They who shun the
smoke often fall into the fire._

Spesso chi troppo fa, poco fa. _Who does too much often does little._

Spesso d’un gran male nasce un gran bene. _Out of a great evil often
comes a great good._

Spesso i doni sono danni. _Gifts are often losses._

Spogliar Pietro per vestir Paolo. _To strip Peter to clothe Paul._

Sproni proprii e cavalli d’altri fanno corte le miglia. _One’s own
spurs and another’s horse make the miles short._

Suocera e nuora, tempesta e gragnuola. _Mother-in-law and
daughter-in-law, storm and hail._

Suon di campana non caccia cornacchia. _The sound of the bell does not
drive away rooks._

Superbo è quel cavallo che non si vuol portar la biada. _It’s a very
proud horse that will not carry his oats._


T.

Taglia la coda al cane, e’ riman cane. _Cut off the dog’s tail, he
remains a dog._

Tal canta che allegro non è. _Some sing who are not merry._

Tal ha belli occhi che niente vi vede. _One may have good eyes and see
nothing._

Tal ha paura che minacciar osa. _Many a one threatens and yet is
afraid._

Tal lascia l’arrosto, che poi ne brama il fumo. _Many a one leaves the
roast who afterwards longs for the smoke of it._

Tal padrone, tal servitore. _Like master like man._

Tal si burla che si confessa. _Some who jest tell tales of themselves._

Tal sprezza la superbia con una maggior superbia. _There are some who
despise pride with a greater pride._

T’annoia il tuo vicino? Prestagli uno zecchino. _Does your neighbour
bore you? Lend him a sequin._

Tante teste, tanti cervelli. _So many heads, so many brains._

Tanti paesi, tante usanze. _So many countries, so many customs._

Tanto buono che non val niente. _So good that he is good for nothing._

Tanto è morir di male quanto d’amore. _It is all one whether you die of
sickness or of love._

Tanto va la secchia al pozzo che vi lascia il manico. _The bucket goes
so often to the well that it leaves its handle there._

Tanto vale il mio nò, quanto il tuo sì. _My No is as good as your Yes._

Tardi furon savj i Troiani. _The Trojans were wise too late._

Tardi si vien con l’acqua quando la casa è arsa. _It is too late to
come with water when the house is burnt down._

Tosto si trova il bastone per dare al cane. _A stick is soon found to
beat a dog._

Tra asino e asino, non corron se non calci. _Nothing passes between
asses but kicks._

Tra corsale e corsale, non si guadagna se non barili vuoti. _Corsairs
against corsairs, there is nothing to win but empty barrels._

Tra due poltroni, il vantaggio è di chi prima conosce l’altro. _Between
two cowards, he has the advantage who first detects the other._

Traduttori, traditori. _Translators, traitors._

Tra la briglia e lo sprone consiste la ragione. _Reason lies between
bridle and spur._

Tra ’l cuoco e il canovaio non è mai nimicizia. _There is never enmity
between the cook and the butler._

Trar la cavezza dietro all’asino. _To throw the halter after the ass._

Tre cose cacciano l’uomo di casa: fumo, goccia, e femmina arrabbiata.
_Three things drive a man out of doors: smoke, dropping water, and a
shrew._

Tre donne e un papero fanno un mercato. _Three women and a goose make a
market._

Tre fratelli, tre castelli. _Three brothers, three castles._

Tre lo sanno, tutti lo sanno. _Three know it, all know it._

Trista è quella casa ove le galline cantano, e ’l gallo tace. _It is a
sorry house where the hens crow and the cock is silent._

Tristo è quel barbiere che ha un sol pettine. _He is a sorry barber who
has but one comb._

Trotto d’asino poco dura. _An ass’s trot does not last long._

Tua camicia non sappia il secreto. _Let not your shirt know your
secret._

Tutte le chiavi non pendono ad una cintura. _All the keys do not hang
at one girdle._

Tutte le dita non son pari. _All the fingers are not alike._

Tutte le parole non voglion risposta. _Not all words require an answer._

Tutte le strade conducono a Roma. _All roads lead to Rome._ (_There are
more ways to the wood than one._)

Tutte le volpi alla fine si riveggono in pellicceria. _At last the
foxes all meet at the furrier’s._

Tutti i gusti son gusti. _All tastes are tastes._ (_There’s no
disputing about tastes._)

Tutti i santi non fanno miracoli. _All saints do not work miracles._

Tutti son bravi quando l’inimico fugge. _All are brave when the enemy
flies._

Tutto è bene che riesce bene. _All’s well that ends well._

Tutto il cervello non è in una testa. _All the brains are not in one
head._

Tutto quello che crolla non cade. _Not all that shakes falls._

Tutto s’accommoda eccetto l’osso del collo. _Everything may be repaired
except the neckbone._

Tutto sapere è niente sapere. _To know everything is to know nothing._


U.

Una aiuta a maritare l’altra. _One daughter helps to marry the other._

Una bugia ne tira dieci. _One lie draws ten after it._

Una campana fa a un comune. _One bell serves a parish._

Una mano lava l’altra, e tutt’e due lavano il viso. _One hand washes
the other, and both wash the face._

Una parola tira l’altra. _One word brings on another._

Una pecora rognosa ne guasta un branco. _One scabby sheep spoils a
flock._

Una pulce non leva il sonno. _One flea does not hinder sleep._

Una rondine non fa l’estate. _One swallow does not make a summer._

Una sella non s’adatta ad un dosso solo. _A saddle fits more backs than
one._

Una spina non fa siepe. _One briar does not make a hedge._

Un avvertito ne val due. _A man warned is as good as two._

Un buon boccone, e cento guai. _One good morsel and a hundred
vexations._

Un canestro d’uva non fa vendemmia. _One basket of grapes does not make
a vintage._

Un chiodo caccia l’altro. _One nail drives out another._

Un coltello aguzza l’altro. _One knife whets another._

Un coltello fa tener l’altro nella guaina. _One knife keeps another in
its sheath._

Un demonio non fa l’inferno. _One devil does not make hell._

Un diavol conosce l’altro. _One devil knows another._

Un diavol scaccia l’altro. _One devil drives out another._

Un fior non fa ghirlanda. _One flower does not make a garland._

Un male ed un frate rare volte soli. _A misfortune and a friar seldom
go alone._

Un matto sa più domandare che sette savj rispondere. _A fool can ask
more questions than seven wise men can answer._

Un nemico è troppo, e cento amici non bastano. _One enemy is too much,
and a hundred friends are not enough._

Uno leva la lepre, un altro la piglia. _One starts the hare, another
catches it._

Un pajo d’orecchie seccherebbero cento lingue. _One pair of ears would
exhaust a hundred tongues._

Un pazzo getta una pietra nel pozzo, e vi voglion cento savii a
cavarnela. _A fool throws a stone into a well, and it requires a
hundred wise men to get it out again._

Un peccato confessato è mezzo perdonato. _A sin confessed is half
forgiven._

Un poco di vero fa creder tutta la bugia. _A little truth makes the
whole lie pass._

Un sorcio mette paura ad un ladro. _A mouse will scare a thief._

Unto alle ruote. _Grease to the wheels._

Un uomo di paglia vuole una donna d’oro. _A man of straw needs a woman
of gold._

Uomo amante, uomo zelante. _A loving man, a jealous man._

Uomo ammogliato, uccello in gabbia. _A married man is a caged bird._

Uomo lento non ha mai tempo. _A slothful man never has time._

Uomo morto non fa guerra. _A dead man does not make war._

Uomo ozioso è il capezzale del diavolo. _An idle man is the devil’s
bolster._

Uomo solitario, o bestia o angiolo. _A solitary man is either a brute
or an angel._

Uscito è dal fango, ed è cascato nel rio. _He got out of the mud and
fell into the river._


V.

Va al mare, se ben vuoi pescare. _Go to the sea if you would fish well._

Val più un asino vivo che un dottore morto. _A living ass is better
than a dead doctor._

Val più un’oncia di discrezione che una libra di sapere. _An ounce of
discretion is better than a pound of knowledge._

Vaso che va spesso al fonte, ci lascia il manico o la fronte. _The
pitcher that goes often to the fountain leaves there either its handle
or its spout._ (_A pitcher that goes oft to the well is broken at
last._)

Vaso vuoto suona meglio. _Empty vessels make most noise._

Vedi Napoli e poi muori. _See Naples and then die._

Vedon più quattr’occhi che due. _Four eyes see more than two._

Vender il miele a chi ha le api. _To sell the honey to one who has the
bees._

Vender la pelle dell’orso innanzi che sia preso. _To sell the skin of
the bear before it is caught._

Vender l’uccello in su la frasca. _To sell the bird in the bush._

Vendetta di cent’anni ha ancora i lattaiuoli. _Revenge a hundred years
old has still its milk-teeth._

Ventre digiuno non ode nessuno. _A hungry belly has no ears._

Ventura aver poco senno basta. _To have luck needs little wit._

Vicino alla chiesa, lontan da Dio. _Near the church far from God._

Vien la fortuna a chi la procura. _Fortune comes to him who strives for
it._

Vino dentro, senno fuora. _When the wine is in the wit is out._

Virtù di silenzio è gran scienza. _The virtue of silence is a great
piece of knowledge._

Vivendo s’impara. _Live and learn._

Vive più il minacciato che l’impiccato. _A threatened man lives longer
than one that is hanged._

Vivi, e lascia vivere. _Live and let live._

Voce di popolo, voce di Dio. _The people’s voice, God’s voice._

Voce d’uno, voce di niuno. _One voice, no voice._

Voler lasciar andare dodici danari al soldo. _To be content to let
twelve pennies pass for a shilling._




GERMAN PROVERBS.


A.

Abends wird der Faule fleißig. At evening the sluggard is busy.

Adam muß eine Eva haben, die er zeiht was er gethan. Adam must
have an Eve, to blame for his own faults.

Adler brüten keine Tauben. Eagles do not breed doves.

Aendern und bessern sind zwei. To change and to better are two
different things.

Affen bleiben Affen, wenn man sie auch in Sammet kleidet. Apes
remain apes, though you clothe them in velvet.

”Alle Frachten lichten,” sagte der Schiffer, da warf er seine Frau
über Bord. “All freight lightens,” said the skipper, when he threw
his wife overboard.

Alle Freier sind reich, und alle Gefangenen arm. All wooers are
rich, and all captives poor.

Alle wissen guten Rath, nur der nicht, der ihn nöthig ist.
Everybody knows good counsel except him that has need of it.

Aller Anfang ist schwer, sprach der Dieb und zuerst stahl einen
Amboß. Every beginning is hard, said the thief, when he began by
stealing an anvil.

Alles wäre gut, wär kein “aber” dabei. Everything would be well
were there not a “but.”

Allzuviel ist nicht genug. Too much is not enough.

Allzuviel zerreißt den Sack. Too much bursts the bag.

Als Adam henkte und Eva spann, wer war denn da der Edelmann?
When Adam delved and Eve span, where was then the gentleman?

Als Christus allein war, versuchte ihn der Teufel. When Christ
was alone, the devil tempted him.

Als David kam ins Alter, sang er fromme Psalter. When David grew
old he sang pious psalms.

Alte Bäume lassen sich nicht biegen. Old trees are not to be
bent.

Alte Kirchen haben dunkle Fenster. Old churches have dark
windows.

Alte Krähen sind schwer zu fangen. Old crows are hard to catch.

Alte Leute sehen am Besten in die Ferne. Old people see best in
the distance.

Alte Liebe rostet nicht. Old love does not rust.

Alte Ochsen treten hart. Old oxen tread hard.

Alte Schweine haben harte Mäuler. Old pigs have hard snouts.

Alte Vögel sind schwer zu rupfen. Old birds are hard to pluck.

Alte Wunden bluten leicht. Old wounds easily bleed.

Amt ohne Sold macht Diebe. Office without pay makes thieves.

An armer Leute Bart lernt der Junge scheeren. On poor people’s
beards the young barber learns his trade.

An der Armuth will jeder den Schuh wischen. Every one likes to
wipe his shoes on poverty.

Andere Städtchen, andere Mädchen. Other towns, other lasses.

Anfang heiß, Mittel lau, Ende kalt. The beginning hot, the
middle lukewarm, the end cold.

Anfang und Ende reichen einander die Hände. Beginning and ending
shake hands.

Armer Leute Reden gehen viel in einen Sack. Poor people’s words
go many to a sackful.

Armuth ist der sechste Sinn. Poverty is the sixth sense.

Armuth ist listig, sie fängt auch einen Fuchs. Poverty is
cunning; it catches even a fox.

Armuth und Hunger haben viel gelehrte Jünger. Poverty and hunger
have many learned disciples.

Arzt hilf dir selbst. Physician heal thyself.

Auch der beste Gaul stolpert einmal. Even the best hack stumbles
once.

Auch der Löwe muß sich vor der Mücke wehren. Even the lion must
defend himself against the flies.

Auch ein Haar hat seinen Schatten. Even a hair casts its shadow.

Auf heiler Haut ist gut schlafen. It is good to sleep in a whole
skin.

Aufgeschoben ist nicht aufgehoben. Forbearance is no acquittance.

Auf den Abend soll man den Tag loben. In the evening one may
praise the day.

Auf einen guten Bissen gehört ein guter Trunk. To good eating
belongs good drinking.

Auf Regen folget Sonnenschein. After rain comes sunshine.

Auf seinem Miste ist der Hahn ein Herr. The cock is a lord on
his own dunghill.

Aus andrer Leuten Häuten ist gut Riemen schneiden. Good thongs
may be cut out of other people’s hides.

Aus dem Regen unter die Traufe kommen. To get out of the rain
under the spout.

Aus den Augen, aus dem Sinn. Out of sight, out of mind.

Aus des Esels Wadel wird kein Sieb. You cannot make a sieve of
an ass’s tail.

Aus klattrigen Fohlen werden die schönsten Hengste. Ragged colts
make the handsomest stallions.

Aus ungelegten Eiern werden spät junge Hühner. Unlaid eggs are a
long time becoming chickens. (Count not your chickens before they are
hatched.)


B.

Bär und Büffel können keinen Fuchs fangen. Bear and bull catch
no fox.

Bald geben ist doppelt geben. To give quickly is to give doubly.

Begonnen ist halb gewonnen. Begun is half done.

Behaupten ist nicht beweisen. Assertion is no proof.

Bei großen Herren muß man fünf gerade sein lassen. With great
men one must allow five to be an even number.

Bei Nacht sind alle Katzen grau. By night all cats are grey.

Beinahe bringt keine Mücke um. Almost never killed a fly.

Beleidigst du einem Mönch, so knappen alle Kuttenzipfel bis nach
Rom. Offend one monk, and the lappets of all cowls will flutter as
far as Rome.

Bellende Hunde beißen nicht. Barking dogs don’t bite.

Bellet ein alter Hund, so soll man aufschauen. When an old dog
barks, look out.

Besser allein, als in schlechter Gesellschaft. Better alone than
in bad company.

Besser: Da läuft er, als: Da hängt er. Better, There he goes,
than, There he hangs.

Besser einäugig als gar blind. Better one-eyed than stone-blind.

Besser ein Flick als ein Loch. Better a patch than a hole.

Besser ein halb Ei als eitel Schale. Better half an egg than
empty shells.

Besser ein lebender Hund als ein todter Löwe. Better a living
dog than a dead lion.

Besser ein lebendiges Wort als hundert todte. Better one living
word than a hundred dead ones.

Besser ein magrer Vergleich als ein fetter Proceß. Better a lean
agreement than a fat lawsuit.

Besser frei in der Fremde als Knecht daheim. Better free in a
foreign land than a serf at home.

Besser freundlich versagen, als unwillig gewähren. Better a
friendly denial than an unwilling compliance.

Besser ist besser. Better is better.

Besser was als gar nichts. Better something than nothing at all.

Besser nichts geben als geraubtes Almosen. Better give nothing
than stolen alms.

Besser ohne Abendessen zu Bette gehen als mit Schulden. Better
to go to bed supperless than run in debt.

Betrug ist der Krämer Wagen und Pflug. Cheating is the chapman’s
cart and plough.

Betrügen ist ehrlicher als stehlen. Cheating is more honourable
than stealing.

Bettelsack ist bodenlos. The beggar’s bag is bottomless.

Bezahlen wir die Musik, so wollen wir dabei auch tanzen. If we
pay for the music we will take part in the dance.

Bist du Amboß, sei geduldig; bist du Hammer, schlage zu. If you
are an anvil, be patient; if you are a hammer, strike hard.

Bittre Pillen vergoldet man. Bitter pills are gilded.

Bliebe der Wolf im Walde, so würd er nicht beschreien. If the
wolf had stayed in the wood there would have been no hue and cry after
him.

Blinder Gaul geht geradezu. A blind horse goes straightforward.

Blödes Herz buhlt keine schöne Frau. Faint heart never won fair
lady.

Blut ist dicker als Wasser. Blood is thicker than water.

Böser Brunnen, da man Wasser muß eintragen. It is a bad well
into which one must put water.

Böser Vögel, böses Ei. Bad bird, bad egg.

Böser Pfennig kommt immer wieder. A bad penny always comes back.

Borgen thut nur einmal wohl. Borrowing does well only once.

Böse Augen sehen nie nichts Gutes. Bad eyes never see any good.

Böse Waare muß man aufschwatzen. Bad ware must be cried up.

Bricht ein Ring, so bricht die ganze Kette. One link broken, the
whole chain is broken.


C.

Christen haben keine Nachbarn. Christians have no neighbours.


D.

Das Amt lehrt den Mann. The office teaches the man.

Das Auge des Herrn schafft mehr als seine beiden Hände. The
master’s eye does more than both his hands.

Das Auge sieht sich nimmer satt. The eye is never satiated with
seeing.

Das Bessere ist ein Feind des Guten. Better is an enemy to good.

Das Beste ist was man in der Hand hat. The best is what one has
in his hand.

Das Beste kauft man am Wohlfeilesten. The best is the cheapest.

Das Ei will klüger sein als die Henne. The egg will be more
knowing than the hen.

Das Glück giebt Vielen zu viel, aber Keinem genug. Fortune gives
many too much, but no one enough.

Das Glück hat Weiberart; liebt Jugend und wechselt gern. Fortune
is like women: loves youth and is fickle.

Das Huhn legt gern ins Nest, worin schon Eier sind. The hen
likes to lay in a nest where there are eggs already.

Das Leder stehlen, und die Schuhe um Gottes willen vergeben. To
steal the leather, and give away the shoes for God’s sake.

Das Nächste das Liebste. The nearest the dearest.

Das Papier ist geduldig. Paper is patient.

Das Pferd, das am Besten zieht, bekömmt die meisten Schläge. The
horse that draws best is the most whipped.

Das Recht hat eine wächserne Nase. Justice has a waxen nose.

Das Roß wird nicht nach dem Sattel beurtheilt. The horse is not
judged of by the saddle.

Das schlechtestes Rad am Wagen knarrt am meisten. The worst
wheel creaks most.

Das Werk lobt den Meister. The work praises the workman.

Dem alten Hunden ist schwer bellen lehren. It is hard to teach
old dogs to bark.

Dem einen Hund ist es leid wenn der andere in die Küche geht.
One dog growls to see another go into the kitchen.

Dem fliehenden Feinde baue goldene Brücken. Build golden bridges
for the flying foe.

Dem Hungrigen ist: harr’, ein hart Wort. Wait, is a hard word to
the hungry.

Dem Zuschauer ist keine Arbeit zu viel. To the looker-on no work
is too hard.

Den Baum muß man biegen, weil er jung ist. The tree must be bent
while it is young.

Den Brunnen decken, so das Kind ertrunken ist. To cover the well
after the child has been drowned in it.

Den Hungrigen ist nicht gut predigen. There is no good in
preaching to the hungry.

Den Kranken ärgert die Fliege an der Wand. The sick man is vexed
with the flies on the wall.

Den letzten beißen die Hunde. The dogs bite the last.

Den todten Löwen kann jeder Hase an der Mähne zupfen. Every hare
may pluck the dead lion’s mane.

Der Adler fängt nicht Fliegen. The eagle does not catch flies.

Der alter Fuhrmann hört gern Knallen. An old coachman loves the
crack of the whip.

Der Amboß ist des Lärms gewohnt. The anvil is used to noise.

Der Amboß fürchtet den Hammer nicht. The anvil is not afraid of
the hammer.

Der Bauch ist ein böser Rathgeber. The belly is a bad adviser.

Der Bauch läßt sich nichts vorlügen. There’s no putting off a
lie upon the belly.

Der beste Prediger ist die Zeit. Time is the best preacher.

Der Eine fängt den Hasen, der Andere ißt ihn. One catches the
hare, and another eats it.

Der Eine schlagt den Nagel ein, der Andere hängt den Hut daran.
One man knocks in the nail, and another hangs his hat on it.

Der Eine schlagt auf den Busch, der Andere kriegt den Vogel. One
beats the bush, and another catches the bird.

Der Esel trägt das Korn in die Mühle, und bekommt Disteln. The
ass carries corn to the mill, and gets thistles.

Der Esel und sein Treiber denken nicht überein. The ass and his
driver do not think alike.

Der Fisch fängt am Kopf an zu stinken. Fish begin to stink at
the head.

Der Fisch will dreimal schwimmen; im Wasser, im Schmalz, und im
Wein. A fish should swim thrice: in water, in sauce, and in wine.

Der Fuchs ändert den Pelz und behält den Schalk. The fox changes
his skin, but keeps the rogue.

Der Geiß sammelt sich arm, die Milde giebt sich reich. Charity
gives itself rich, covetousness hoards itself poor.

Der größte Schritt ist der aus der Thür. The greatest step is
out of doors.

Der Hahn ist König auf seinem Miste. The cock is king on his own
dunghill.

Der Hahn schließt die Augen, wann er krähet,—weil er es auswendig
kann. The cock shuts his eyes when he crows, because he knows it by
heart.

Der Henker ist ein scharfer Barbier. The executioner is a keen
shaver.

Der Hund, der den Hasen ausspürt, ist so gut wie der ihn fängt.
The dog that starts the hare is as good as the one that catches it.

Der Hund raset wider den Stein, und nicht wider den, so
geworfen. The dog rages at the stone, not at him that throws it.

Der Hunger treibt dem Wolf aus dem Walde. Hunger drives the wolf
out of the wood.

Der Junge kann sterben, der Alte muß sterben. The young may die,
the old must die.

Der König kann nicht allweg regieren wie er will. The king
cannot always rule as he wishes.

Der Krieg ist lustig den unerfahrnen. War is pleasant to those
who have not tried it.

Der Krug geht so lange zum Wasser bis er zerbricht. The pitcher
goes so often to the well, that it gets broken at last.

Der leere Wagen muß dem vollen ausweichen. The empty waggon must
make room for the full one.

Der Letzte hat den Sack gestohlen. The last stole the sack.

Der Letzte thut die Thür zu. The last shuts the door.

Der liebe Niemand ist an allem schuld. Honest Nobody is to blame
for all.

Der Mann im Monde hat das Holz gestohlen. The man in the moon
stole the wood.

Der Mensch denkt’s, Gott lenkt’s. Man proposes, God disposes.

Der Mensch liebt nur einmal. Man loves but once.

Der Mönch antwortet, wie der Abt singt. The monk responds as the
abbot chants.

Der Müller ist fromm, der Haare auf den Zähnen hat. That miller
is honest who has hair on his teeth.

Der Narben lacht, wer Wünden nie gefühlt. He laughs at scars who
never felt a wound.

Der Neutrale wird von oben begossen, von unten gesengt. Neutrals
are soused from above, and singed from below.

Der Pabst frißt Bauern, säuft Edelleute, und schießt Mönche. The
pope eats peasants, gulps gentlemen, and voids monks.

Der Pfaff liebt seine Heerde, doch die Lämmlein mehr als die
Wedder. The priest loves his flock, but the lambs more than the
wethers.

Der Schlüssel, den man braucht, wird blank. The key that is used
grows bright.

Der Stärkste hat Recht. Right is with the strongest.

Der Teufel ist nie so schwarz, als man ihn mahlt. The devil is
never so black as he is painted.

Der Teufel ist artig, wenn man ihm schmeichelt. The devil is
civil when he is flattered.

Der Teufel gießt gern was schon naß ist. The devil likes to
souse what is already wet.

Der Wald hat Ohren, das Feld hat Augen. The wood has ears, the
field has eyes.

Der Weg zum Verderben ist mit guten Vorsätzen gepflastert. The
road to ruin is paved with good intentions.

Der Weise hat die Ohren lang, die Zunge kurz. The wise man has
long ears and a short tongue.

Der Wille giebt dem Werke den Namen. The will gives the work its
name.

Der Wille ist des Werkes Seele. The will is the soul of the work.

Des Königs Spreu gilt mehr, als andere Leute Korn. The king’s
chaff is better than other folk’s corn.

Des Mannes Mutter ist der Frau Teufel. The husband’s mother is
the wife’s devil.

Des Menschen Angesicht ist eines Löwen. A man’s face is a lion’s.

Des Schulzen Kuh und eines Andern Kuh sind zweierlei Kühe. The
bailiff’s cow and another’s cow are two different cows.

Des Volkes Stimme ist Gottes Stimme. The people’s voice is God’s
voice.

Dickkopf, Dummkopf. Big head, little wit.

Die Aemter sind Gottes; die Amtleute des Teufels. Places are
God’s; placemen are the devil’s.

Die ärgsten Studenten werden die frömmsten Prediger. The most
disorderly students make the most pious preachers.

Die Augen glauben sich selbst, die Ohren andern Leuten. The eyes
believe themselves; the ears other people.

Die Augen sind weiter dann der Bauch. The eye is bigger than the
belly.

Die Armen müssen tanzen wie die Reichen Pfeiffen. The poor must
dance as the rich pipe.

Die Bärenhaut soll man nicht verkaufen ehe der Bär gestochen
ist. Don’t sell the bear-skin before you have killed the bear.

Die Bauern bitten nichts so sehr von Gott, als daß den Junkern die
Rosse nicht Sterben, sonst würden sie die Bauern mit Sporen reiten.
There is nothing for which the boors pray so much to God as that the
horses of the squirearchy may not die, for otherwise they would ride
the boors with spurs.

Die Besen kann man am wohlfeilsten geben, die man fertig
stiehlt. Those besoms can be sold cheapest which are stolen ready
made.

Die besten Freunde stehen im Beutel. The best friends are in
one’s purse.

Die Beute soll man nicht vor dem Siege theilen. Do not divide
the spoil till the victory is won.

Die Ehe ist Himmel und Hölle. Marriage is heaven and hell.

Die Fische haben gut leben, die trinken wann sie wollen. The
fish lead a pleasant life, they drink when they like.

Die Gaben sind wie die Geber. Gifts are according to the giver.

Die gelehrte Narren sind über alle Narren. Learned fools exceed
all fools.

Die gezählten Schafe frißt der Wolf auch. Even counted sheep are
eaten by the wolf.

Der Katzen Scherz, der Mäuse Tod. What is sport to the cat is
death to the mouse.

Die Katze möchte die Fische wohl, sie mag aber die Füße nicht naß
machen. The cat loves fish, but is loth to wet her feet.

Die Kleinen reden gar so gern von dem, was die Großen thun.
Little folks are fond of talking about what great folks do.

Die Kühe, die am meisten brüllen, geben am wenigsten Milch. The
cows that low most give the least milk.

Die Kuh leckt kein fremdes Kalb. The cow licks no strange calf.

Die Kuh milcht durchs Maul. The cow gives milk through her mouth.

Die Schlüssel hängen nicht alle an einem Gürtel. All the keys do
not hang at one girdle.

Die Schönheit ist ein guter Empfehlungsbrief. Beauty is a good
letter of introduction.

Die Schönste putzt das Licht. The handsomest snuffs the candle.

Die Schulden sind der nächste Erbe. The debts go to the next
heir.

Die Sonnenuhr zählt nur die heitern Stunden. The sun-dial counts
only the bright hours.

Die Sonne wirds bringen an den Tag, was unterm Schnee verborgen
lag. The sun will bring to light what lay under the snow.

Die süßesten Trauben hängen am höchsten. The sweetest grapes
hang highest.

Die Wände haben Ohren. Walls have ears.

Die Welt will Nachteulen haben, sich zu verwundern. The world
likes to have night-owls, that it may have matter for wonder.

”Die Worte sind gut,” sprach jener Wolf, “aber ich komm ins Dorf
nicht.” “Your words are fair,” said the wolf, “but I will not come
into the village.”

Doktor Luthers Schuhe sind nicht allen Dorfpriestern gerecht.
Doctor Luther’s shoes do not fit every parish priest.

Draußen hat man hundert Augen, daheim keine. Abroad one has a
hundred eyes, at home not one.

Drei Frauen, drei Gänse, und drei Frösche, machen einen
Jahrmarkt. Three women, three geese, and three frogs, make a fair.

Dreimal umgezogen ist einmal abgebrannt. Three removes are as
bad as a fire.

Dreizehn Nonnen, vierzehn Kinder! Thirteen nuns, fourteen
children!

Ducaten werden beschnitten, Pfennige nicht. Ducats are clipped,
pence are not.


E.

Edel ist, der edel thut. Noble is, that noble does.

Edel macht das Gemüth, nicht das Geblüt. ’Tis the mind ennobles,
not the blood.

Ehrlich währt am längsten. Honesty lasts longest. (Honesty is
the best policy.)

Eifersucht ist eine Leidenschaft, die mit Eifer sucht, was Leiden
schaft. Jealousy is a pain which eagerly seeks what causes pain.

Eigenliebe macht die Augen trübe. Self-love is bad, and makes
the eyes sad.

Eigenlob stinkt, Freundes Lob hinkt, Fremd Lob ist wahr und dauert
wohl ein Jahr. Self-praise stinks, friends praise hinks, the
stranger’s is sincere, and may last for a year.

”Ei ist Ei,” sagte der Küster, aber er nahm das Gans Ei. “An egg
is an egg,” said the beadle, but he took the goose-egg.

Eile mit Weile. Hasten at leisure.

Eilte die Hündin nicht, so würfe sie nicht blinde Junge. If the
bitch were not in such haste, she would not litter blind puppies.

Ein Advokat und ein Wagenrad wollen geschmiert sein. A lawyer
and a cart-wheel must be greased.

Ein alter Fuchs läuft nicht zum zweiten Mal in’s Garn. An old
fox does not run twice into the snare.

Ein Blinder schluckt manche Fliege mit herunter. A blind man
swallows many a fly.

Ein bös Auge verdirbt das andere. One bad eye spoils the other.

Ein Brand allein brennt nicht lange. One log does not burn long
by itself.

Ein Dieb stiehlt sich selten reich. A thief seldom grows rich by
thieving.

Ein Dienst ist des andern Werth. One good turn deserves another.

Ein Ding ist nicht bös, wenn man es gut versteht. A thing is not
bad if well understood.

Ein Doktor und ein Bauer wissen mehr als ein Doktor allein. A
doctor and a boor know more than a doctor alone.

Eine Biene ist so gut als eine Handvoll Fliegen. One bee is as
good as a handful of flies.

Eine Blume macht keinen Kranz. One flower makes no garland.

Einen Nackten kann man nicht ausziehen. There is no stripping a
naked man.

Einer kann reden und Sieben können singen. One can speak and
seven can sing.

Ein ersparter Pfennig ist zweimal verdient. A penny saved is
two-pence got.

Ein Esel schimpft den andern “Lang-ohr.” One ass nicknames
another “Longears.”

Ein faules Ei verdirbt den ganzen Brei. One rotten egg spoils
the whole pudding.

Ein Feind ist zu viel, und hundert Freunde sind zu wenig. One
foe is too many, and a hundred friends are too few.

Ein Frauenhaar zieht mehr als ein Glockenseil. One hair of a
woman draws more than a bell-rope.

Ein guter Name ist ein reiches Erbtheil. A good name is a rich
inheritance.

Ein guter Weg um, ist nicht krumm. The farthest way about is the
nearest way home.

Ein gutes Mahl ist Henkenswerth. A good meal is worth hanging
for.

Eine Hälfte der Welt verlacht die andere. One half the world
laughs at the other half.

Eine Handvoll Gewalt ist besser als ein Sackvoll Recht. A
handful of might is better than a sack full of right.

Eine Hand wäscht die andere. One hand washes the other.

Ein Heute ist besser als zehn Morgen. One to-day is better than
ten to-morrows.

Ein hungriger Magen hat keine Ohren. A hungry belly has no ears.

Ein jeder ist Kaiser in seinem Lande. Every one is emperor on
his own ground.

Eine Katze hat neun Leben, wie die Zwiebel sieben Häute. A cat
has nine lives, as the onion seven skins.

Eine Krähe hackt der anderen die Augen nicht aus. One crow does
not peck another’s eye out.

Eine Krähe macht keinen Winter. One crow does not make a winter.

Eine Nadel in’s Heu suchen. To look for a needle in a bottle of
hay.

Einen Mohren kann man nicht weiß waschen. One cannot wash a
blackamoor white.

Eine Nothlüge schadet nichts. A necessary lie is harmless.

Ein Sack voll Flöhe ist leichter zu hüten wie ein Weib. A sack
full of fleas is easier to watch than a woman.

Ein schlechter Schmidt, der den Rauch nicht vertragen kann. He
is a bad smith who cannot bear smoke.

Ein schlechter Schütz, der keine Ausrede findet. He is a bad
shot who cannot find an excuse.

Ein schlechtes Pferd, das sein Futter nicht verdient. It is a
bad horse that does not earn his fodder.

Eine Schwalbe macht keinen Frühling. One swallow does not make a
spring.

Eines Mannes Rede ist keine Rede, man muß sie hören beide. One
man’s story is no story; hear both sides. (One story is good till
another is told.)

Eine Stunde Schlaf vor Mitternacht, ist besser als zweie
darnach. One hour’s sleep before midnight is better than two after
it.

Eine Unze Mutterwitz ist besser als ein Pfund Schulwitz. An
ounce of mother-wit is worth a pound of school-wit.

Ein Keil treibt den andern. One wedge drives another.

Ein Krämer, der nicht Mausdreck für Pfeffer aufschwatzen kann,
hat sein Handwerk nicht gelernt. A huckster who cannot pass off
mouseturd for pepper, has not learned his trade.

Ein leerer Sack steht nicht aufrecht. An empty sack will not
stand upright.

Ein Loth Märzenstaub ist einen Ducaten werth. A load of March
dust is worth a ducat.

Ein magerer Vergleich ist besser denn ein fetter Proceß. A lean
compromise is better than a fat lawsuit. (Agree, for the law is costly.)

Einmal in der Leute Mund, kommt man übel wieder heraus. Once in
people’s mouths, ’tis hard to get well out of them.

Einmal, Keinmal. Once upon a time, no time.

Ein Mann, ein Wort; ein Wort, ein Mann. A man, a word; a word, a
man.

Ein Mensch ist des andern Teufel. One man is another’s devil.

Ein Messer wetzt das andere. One knife whets another.

Ein Mühlstein wird nicht moosig. A millstone gathers no moss.

Ein Nagel erhällt ein Eisen, das Eisen ein Roß, das Roß den Mann,
der Mann eine Burg und die Burg das ganze Land. A nail secures the
horse-shoe, the shoe the horse, the horse the man, the man the castle,
and the castle the whole land.

Ein Narr kann mehr fragen, als sieben Weise antworten. One fool
may ask more questions than seven wise men can answer.

Ein Narr lobt den andern. One fool praises another.

Ein: “Nimm hin” ist besser, als zehn: “Helf Gott!” One “take
this” is better than ten “God help you!”

Ein Pfennig mit Recht, ist besser denn tausend mit Unrecht. A
single penny fairly got, is worth a thousand that are not.

Ein Quentlein Klugheit ist besser denn ein Pfund Weisheit. A
dram of discretion is worth a pound of wisdom.

Ein Schuh ist nicht Jedem gerecht. One shoe will not fit every
foot.

Ein Schwert hält das andere in der Scheide. One sword keeps
another in the sheath.

Ein Sperling in der Hand ist besser denn eine Taube auf dem
Dache. A sparrow in the hand is better than a pigeon on the roof.

Ein Weib verschweigt nur, was sie nicht weiß. A woman keeps
secret only what she does not know.

Ein wenig zu spät ist viel zu spät. A little too late is much
too late.

Einer Frau und einem Glas drohet jede Stunde was. A woman and a
glass are ever in danger.

Eines Narren Bolzen ist bald verschossen. A fool’s bolts is soon
shot.

Ein Trunk auf Salat schadet dem Doctor einen Ducat; ein Trunk auf
ein Ei schadet ihm zwei. Drink upon salad costs the doctor a ducat;
drink upon eggs costs him two.

Ein Vater ernährt eher zehn Kinder, denn zehn Kinder einen
Vater. A father maintains ten children better than ten children one
father.

Ein Vogel in der Schüssel ist besser als hundert in der Luft.
One bird in the dish is better than a hundred in the air.

Ein Weib mit vielfältigem Rock hat einfältigen Kopf. A woman
strong in flounces is weak in the head.

Ein Zaun dazwischen mag die Liebe erfrischen. A fence between
makes love more keen.

Ein Zaun währt drei Jahre, ein Hund überwährt drei Zäune, ein Pferd
drei Hunde, ein Mensch drei Pferde. A fence lasts three years, a
dog lasts three fences, a horse three dogs, and a man three horses.

Ende gut, alles gut. All’s well that ends well.

Er geht herum, wie die Katze um den heißen Brei. He goes about
it like a cat round hot milk.

Er geht so gern als der Dieb an den Galgen. He goes as willingly
as a thief to the gallows.

Er hat Bohnen in den Ohren. He has beans in his ears. (Who so
deaf as he that will not hear.)

Er hat die Henne für das Ei gegeben. He has given the hen for
the egg.

Er ist ein armer Fuchs, der nur ein Loch hat. It is a poor fox
that has but one hole.

Er muß ein scharf Gesicht haben, der eine Jungfrau kennen woll.
He must have keen eyes that would know a maid at sight.

Er stecht seine Nase in Alles. He sticks his nose in everything.
(He has his finger in every pie.)

Erfahrung ist die beste Lehrmeisterin. Experience is the best
teacher.

Ersparter Pfennig ist so gut wie der erworbene. A penny saved is
a penny gained.

Erst besinn’s, dann beginn’s. Look before you leap.

Erst wieg’s, dann wag’s. First weigh, then venture.

Erziehst du dir einen Raben, so wird er dir die Augen ausgraben.
Bring up a raven and he will peck out your eyes.

Es fällt keine Eiche vom ersten Streiche. Never fell oak at the
very first stroke.

Es findet jeder seinen Meister. Every one has his master.

Es flog ein Gänschen über den Rhein, es kam ein Gigack wieder
heim. A gosling flew over the Rhine, and came home a goose.

Es geschieht nichts Neues unter der Sonne. There’s nothing new
under the sun.

Es giebt mehr alte Weintrinker als alte Aerzte. There are more
old tipplers than old doctors.

Es giebt nur zwei gute Weiber auf der Welt: die Eine ist gestorben,
die Andere nicht zu finden. There are only two good women in the
world; the one is dead, the other not to be found.

Es hilft keine Krone für das Hauptweh. A crown is no cure for
the headache.

Es ist besser das Kind weine, denn der Vater. It is better the
child should cry than the father.

Es ist besser mit ’nem ganzen Narren handeln, denn mit ’nem
halben. It is better to deal with a whole fool than half a fool.

Es ist ein böser Vogel, der in sein Nest hofirt. It is an ill
bird that fouls its own nest.

Es ist ein schlechter Arbeitsmann, der nicht vom Handwerk reden
kann. He is a bad workman who cannot talk of work.

Es ist ein weises Kind das seinen Vater kennt. It is a wise
child that knows its own father.

Es ist geschrieben: “Was nicht dein ist, das laß liegen.” ’Tis
written, “What’s not your own, that let alone.”

Es ist kein Gesetz es hat ein Loch, wer’s finden kann. There is
no law but has a hole in it, for those who can find it out.

Es ist kein Heiliger so klein, er will seine eigene Kerze haben.
There is no saint so petty but claims his own candle.

Es ist kein Kinderspiel, wenn ein altes Weib tanzt. It is no
child’s play when an old woman dances.

Es ist leichter einen Scheffel voll Flöhe hüten als ein Weib. It
is easier to guard against a bushel of fleas than a woman.

Es ist leichter zwei Herde bauen, als auf einem immer Feuer
haben. It is easier to build two hearths than always to keep fire
on one.

Es ist nicht Alles Gold, was glänzt. All is not gold that
glitters.

Es ist nicht gut der Poet im Dorfe zu sein. It is not good to be
the poet of a village.

Es ist nicht noth daß die Pfaffen heirathen, so lange die Bauern
Weiber haben. There is no occasion for priests to marry, while
peasants have wives.

Es ist nöthiger den Mund zu bewahren, denn die Kiste. It is more
necessary to guard the mouth than the chest.

Es ist schwer stehlen, wo der Wirth selbst ein Dieb ist. It is
hard to steal where the host himself is a thief.

Es ist zu viel von einer Katze begehrt, daß sie bei der Milch sitze,
und nicht davon schlecke. It is too much to expect of a cat that
she should sit by the milk and not lap it.

Es kommen eben so viel Kalbshäute zu Markt als Kuhhäute. There
come just as many calf-skins as cow-skins to market.

Es kommt allzeit Pharao, der Joseph nicht kennt. There is always
a Pharaoh who does not know Joseph.

Es müssen starke Beine sein, die glückliche Tage ertragen
können. They must be strong legs that can support prosperous days.

Es nimmt kein Weib einen alten Mann um Gottes willen. No woman
marries an old man for God’s sake.

Es reitet ein jeder sein Steckenpferd. Every man rides his own
hobby.

Es schlafen nicht alle, welche die Augen zu haben. All are not
asleep who have their eyes shut.

Es schlägt nicht immer ein wenn’s donnert. A bolt does not
always fall when it thunders. (There are more threatened than struck.)

Es sind nicht alle frei, die ihrer Kette spotten. All are not
free who mock their chains.

Es sind nicht alle Jäger, die das Horn gut blasen. All are not
hunters that blow the horn.

Es sind nicht alle Köche, die lange Messer tragen. All are not
cooks who carry long knives.

Es sind so gute Katzen, die die Mäuse verjagen, als die sie
fangen. The cats that drive away mice are as good as those that
catch them.

Es steckt nicht im Spiegel, was man im Spiegel sieht. That is
not in the looking-glass which is seen in the looking-glass.

Es trinken tausend sich den Tod, ehe einer stirbt vor Durstes
Noth. Thousands drink themselves to death before one dies of thirst.

Es verdirbt viel Witz in eines Armen Mannes Beutel. Much wit is
lost in a poor man’s purse.

Es weht nicht allezeit derselbe Wind. The wind does not always
blow from the same quarter.

Es weiß Niemand besser wo der Schuh drückt als der ihn trägt. No
one knows better where the shoe pinches than he who wears it.

Es will dem Diebe kein Baum gefallen, daran er hänge. The thief
cannot find any tree that suits him for a gallows.

Es will keiner der Katze die Schellen anhängen. No one likes to
bell the cat.

Es wird kein blöder Hund fett. A bashful dog never fattens.

Es wird keine Hochzeit vollbracht, es wird eine andere dabei
erdacht. One marriage is never celebrated but another grows out of
it.

Esel singen schlecht, weil sie zu hoch anstimmen. Asses sing
badly, because they pitch their voices too high.

Essen und Trinken muß seyn und wären alle Bäume Galgen. We must
eat and drink though every tree were a gallows.

Etwas ist besser als gar nichts. Better aught than nought.


F.

Faulheit ist der Schlüssel zur Armuth. Sloth is the key to
poverty.

Fette Hühner legen wenig Eier. Fat hens lay few eggs.

Fette Küche, magere Erbschaft. A fat kitchen makes a lean will.

Feuer im Herzen bringt Rauch in den Kopf. Fire in the heart
sends smoke into the head.

Feuer und Wasser sind gute Diener, aber schlimme Herren. Fire
and water are good servants, but bad masters.

Fleiß ist des Glückes Vater. Industry is the parent of fortune.

Fliege nicht eher, als bis dir die Federn gewachsen sind. Don’t
fly till your wings are feathered.

Frauen und Jungfrauen soll man loben, es sei wahr oder erlogen.
Women and maidens must be praised, whether truly or falsely.

Freie um die Wittwe, dieweil sie noch trauert. Woo the widow
whilst she is in weeds.

Freier Mann, freies Gut. Free man, free goods. (So: Free ships,
free goods.—_American._)

Fremdes Pferd und eigene Sporen haben bald den Wind verloren.
Another man’s horse and your own spurs outrun the wind.

Freud’ und Leid sind nahe Nachbarn. Joy and sorrow are next-door
neighbours. (Joy and sorrow are to-day and to-morrow.)

Frisch gewagt ist halb gewonnen. Boldly ventured is half won.

Fromm, klug, weis und mild, gehört in des Adels Schild. Piety,
prudence, wit, and civility, are the elements of true nobility.

Fromme Leute wohnen weit auseinander. Good people live far
asunder.

Früh auf und spät nieder, bringt verlorenes Gut wieder. Early to
rise and late to bed, lifts again the debtor’s head.

Früh zu Bett und früh wieder auf, macht gesund und reich in
Kauf. Early to bed and early to rise, makes a man healthy, wealthy,
and wise.

Frühe Hochzeit, lange Liebe. Early marriage, long love.

Fünf Finger fassen mehr als zwei Gabeln. Five fingers hold more
than two forks.

Für Gerechte giebt es keine Gesetze. For the upright there are
no laws.

Fürsten-Gunst, Aprillenwetter, Frauenlieb und Rosenblätter,
Würfelspiel und Kartenglück, ändern sich all’ Augenblick. Royal
favour, April weather, woman’s love, rose-leaves, dice, and card-luck,
change every moment.

Fürsten haben lange Hände und viele Ohren. Princes have long
hands and many ears.


G.

Gäb es keine Narren, so gäb es keine Weisen. Were there no
fools, there would be no wise men.

Gebet dem Kaiser was des Kaisers ist, und Gott was Gottes ist.
Give unto the king what is the king’s, and unto God what is God’s.

Gebranntes Kind fürchtet das Feuer. A burnt child dreads the
fire.

Gebrauchter Pflug blinkt, stehend Wasser stinkt. A used plough
shines, standing water stinks.

Gedanken sind zollfrei, aber nicht Höllenfrei. Thoughts are
toll-free, but not hell-free.

Gefährte munter kürzet die Meilen. Cheerful company shortens the
miles.

”Gehe hin, werd ein Krämer, ein Schalk,” sagt der Henker zu seinem
Knecht. “Away with you, be a pedlar, a knave,” says the hangman to
his man.

Geld genommen, um Freiheit gekommen. Money taken, freedom
forsaken.

Geld im Beutel vertreibt die Schwermuth. Money in the purse
dispels melancholy.

Geld ist der Mann. Money makes the man.

Gelegenheit macht den Dieb. Opportunity makes the thief.

Gelehrte Narren sind über alle Narren. Learned fools are the
greatest fools.

Gelehrten, ist gut predigen. A word is enough to the wise.

Gemalte Blumen riechen nicht. Painted flowers are scentless.

Gemein Geplärr ist nie ganz leer. Common fame is seldom to blame.

Gemiethet Roß und eigene Sporen machen kurze Meilen. A hired
horse and one’s own spurs make short miles.

Gemsen steigen hoch und werden doch gefangen. The chamois climbs
high and yet is caught.

Genug ist über einen Sack voll. Enough is better than a sackful.

Geredt ist geredt, man kann es mit keinem Schwamme abwischen.
What is said is said, and no sponge can wipe it out.

Geschenke halten die Freundschaft warm. Presents keep friendship
warm.

Geschenktem Gaul sieht man nicht in’s Maul. Look not a gift
horse in the mouth.

Geschrei macht den Wolf größer als er ist. Report makes the wolf
bigger than he is.

Getaufter Jude, beschnittener Christ. A baptised Jew is a
circumcised Christian.

Gewarnter Mann ist halb gerettet. A man warned is half saved.

Gewohnheit ist ein’ andere Natur. Custom is second nature.

Gieb nie das Fell, wo du mit der Wolle zahlen kannst. Never give
the skin when you can pay with the wool.

Giebt es Krieg, so macht der Teufel die Hölle weiter. In time of
war the devil makes more room in hell.

Glaub’ ist besser als bares Geld. Credit is better than ready
money.

”Gleich und Gleich gesellt sich gern,” sprach her Teufel zum
Köhler. “Like will to like,” as the devil said to the coal-burner.

Gleiches Blut, gleiches Gut und gleiche Jahre, machen die besten
Heirathspaare. Like blood, like means, and like age, make the
happiest marriage.

Glück und Unglück sind zwei Eimer im Galgenbrunnen. Fortune and
misfortune are two buckets in a well.

Glück und Weiber haben die Narren lieb. Fortune and women are
partial to fools.

”Glück zu! Gott ehre das Handwerk!” sprach der Schinder zum
Richter. “Success to you! God speed the craft!” as the hangman said
to the judge.

Glücklich ist, wer vergißt, was nicht mehr zu ändern ist. He is
lucky who forgets what cannot be mended.

Glücklich über die Bruk, verlacht man San Nepomuck. Safe over
the bridge, one laughs at St. Nepomuck.

Gold liegt tief im Berge, aber Koth am Wege. Gold lies deep in
the mountain, dirt on the highway.

Golden Gebiß macht’s Pferd nicht besser. A golden bit makes none
the better horse.

Goldener Hammer bricht eisernes Thor. A golden hammer breaks an
iron gate. (Gold goes in at any gate.)

Gott hilft dem Stärksten. God helps the strongest.

Gott ist überall, außer wo er seinen Statthalter hat. God is
everywhere, except where he has his delegate.

Gott macht gesund, und der Doktor kriegt das Geld. God cures the
sick, and the doctor gets the money.

Gottes Freund, der Pfaffen Feind. God’s friend, the priest’s foe.

Gottes Mühle geht langsam, aber sie mahlt fein. God’s mill goes
slowly, but it grinds well.

Groß sein thut’s nicht allein, sonst holte die Kuh den Hasen
ein. Greatness alone is not enough, or the cow would outrun the
hare.

Große Bäume geben mehr Schatten als Früchte. Great trees give
more shade than fruit.

Große Diebe hängen die kleinen. Great thieves hang little
thieves.

Große Fische fängt man in großen Wassern. Great fish are caught
in great waters.

Große Herren dürfen mit Heiligen scherzen. Great men may jest
with saints.

Große Kirchen, kleine Heiligen. Big churches, little saints.

Große Schwätzer sind gemeiniglich Lügner. Great talkers are
commonly liars.

Große Worte und Federn gehen viel auf ein Pfund. Of big words
and feathers many go to the pound.

Großer Herren Bitte ist Befehl. Great men’s requests are
commands.

Großer Herren Leute lassen sich was bedünken. Great men’s
servants don’t think little of themselves.

Großer Prahler, schlechter Zahler. Great say-masters, bad
pay-masters.

Grüne Weihnacht, weiße Ostern. Green Christmas, a white Easter.

Gut Gewissen ist ein sanftes Ruhekissen. A good conscience is a
soft pillow.

Gut macht Uebermuth, Armuth macht Demuth. Riches cause
arrogance; poverty, meekness.

Güte bricht einem kein Bein. Kindness breaks no bones.

Gute Käufe leeren den Beutel. Good bargains empty the purse.

Guter Anfang ist die halbe Arbeit. Well begun is half done.

Guter Rath kommt nie zu spät. Good counsel never comes too late.

Guter Rath kommt über Nacht. Good counsel comes over night.

Guter Wein bedarf keines Kranzes. Good wine needs no bush.

Guter Wein ist der Alten Milch. Good wine is milk for the aged.

Guter Wein verdirbt den Beutel, und Schlechter den Magen. Good
wine ruins the purse, and bad the stomach.

Guter Wein verkauft sich selbst. Good wine sells itself.

Gutschmecke macht Bettelsäcke. A lordly taste makes a beggar’s
purse.


H.

”Hab’ ich” ist ein besserer Vogel als “Hätt’ ich.” “I have” is a
better bird than “If I had.”

”Habe gehabt” ist ein armer Mann. “I have had” is a poor man.

Haben ist Haben, komm es woher es wolle. Having is having, come
whence it may.

Halbes Haus, halbe Hölle. Half a house is half a hell.

Halt’s mit ben Nachbarn, geh’ es dir wohl oder übel. Keep well
with your neighbours, whether right or wrong.

Hans kommt durch seine Dummheit fort. Jack gets on by his
stupidity.

Hänschen, lerne nicht zu viel, du mußt sonst viel thun. Don’t
learn too much, Jack, else you must do a great deal.

”Hätte ich gewußt” ist ein armer Mann. “Had I known” is a poor
man.

Hart gegen hart nimmer gut ward. Hard against hard never was
good.

Hast du Geld, so setz dich nieder; hast du keines, so scheer dich
wieder. If you’ve money, take a seat; if you’ve none, take to your
feet.

”Hast du kein Geld, so werd ein Amtmann!” sagte jener Hofnarr zu
seinem Fürsten. “If you have no money, turn placeman!” as the court
fool said to his sovereign.

Hast du nicht Pfeile im Köcher, so misch dich nicht unter die
Schützen. If you have no arrows in your quiver, go not with archers.

Hast du’s nicht mit Scheffeln, so hast’s doch wohl mit Löffeln.
If you can’t get it in bushels, take it in spoonfuls.

Hastiger Mann war nie Verräther. The hasty man was never a
traitor.

Hat die Henne ein Ei gelegt, so gacket sie. When the hen has
laid an egg she cackles.

Hehler ist so gut wie Stehler. The concealer is as bad as the
thief.

Heirathen in Eile, bereut man mit Weile. Marry in haste, repent
at leisure.

Heirathen in’s Blut thut selten gut. Marrying in the blood is
never good.

Heirathen ist leicht, Haushalten ist schwer. Marrying is easy,
but housekeeping is hard.

Heller, steh auf, laß den Gulden niedersitzen. Stand up,
farthing, let the florin sit down. (Stand up, cent, let the dollar sit
down.)

Henke nicht alles auf einen Nagel. Do not hang all on one nail.

Herodes und Pilatus sind gute Freund’! Herod and Pilate are good
friends!

Heut’ im Putz, morgen im Schmutz. To-day in finery, to-morrow in
filth.

Heute für Geld, morgen umsonst. To-day for money, to-morrow for
nothing.

Heute Kaufmann, morgen Bettelmann. Merchant to-day, beggar
to-morrow.

Heute muß dem Morgen nichts borgen. To-day must borrow nothing
of to-morrow.

Heute roth, morgen todt. To-day red, to-morrow dead.

Hilf dir selbst, so hilft dir Gott. God helps those who help
themselves.

Hin ist hin, da leihet kein Jude mehr darauf. Gone is gone; no
Jew will lend upon it.

Hinterm Kreuz versteckt sich der Teufel. The devil lurks behind
the cross.

Hochmuth kommt zu Fall. Pride will have a fall.

Hohe Häuser sind gemeinlich unter dem Dache leer. High houses
are mostly empty in the upper story.

Hörensagen ist halb gelogen. Hearsay is half lies.

Hunde, die viel bellen, beißen nicht. Dogs that bark much don’t
bite.

Hundert Jahre Unrecht macht keine Stunde Recht. A hundred years
of wrong do not make an hour of right.

Hundert Jahren Kummer bezahlen keinen Heller Schulden. A hundred
years of regret pay not a farthing of debt.

Hunger ist der beste Koch. Hunger is the best cook.

Hungrige Fliegen stechen übel. Hungry flies sting sore.

Hurtig zur Anbiß, hurtig zur Arbeit. Quick at meat, quick at
work.

Husaren beten um Krieg, und der Doktor um das Fieber. Hussars
pray for war, and the doctor for fever.

Hut in der Hand, geht durch’s ganze Land. Hat in hand goes
through the land.


I.

Ich brauche keine Hummeln in meinem Bienenkorbe. I want no
drones in my bee-hive. (_So Shakspeare_, “Drones hive not with
me.”—_Shylock_.)

Ich habe den Hund lieber zum Freund als zum Feind. I would
rather have a dog my friend than enemy.

Ich möchte wissen wie der hieß, so nie vom Weib sich narren
ließ. Who’s the man that was never fooled by a woman.

Ich sehe so tief in einen Mühlstein, als ein Anderer. I can see
as far into a mill-stone as another man.

Ich will den Gaul gewinnen, oder den Sattel verlieren. I will
win the horse, or lose the saddle.

”Ich will keinen Hund beißen, denn ich muß meine Zähne für den Wolf
sparen,” sagt der Schafhund. “I will not bite any dog,” says the
shepherd’s dog, “for I must save my teeth for the wolf.”

Im Becher ersaufen mehr als im Meer. More are drowned in the
bowl than in the sea.

Im Hause der Gehenkten soll man nicht vom Stricke reden. Never
speak of a rope in the house of one who was hanged.

Im Scherz klopft man an, und im Ernst wird aufgemacht. We knock
in jest, and it is opened in earnest.

Im Spaß gesagt, im Ernst gemeint. Said in sport, meant in
earnest.

Im Spiegel sieht man die Gestalt, im Wein das Herz. In the
looking-glass we see our form, in wine the heart.

Immer etwas Neues, selten etwas Gutes. Always something new,
seldom something good.

Immer nur ein Haar und der Mann wird kahl. Ever one hair, only
one, and the man is bald at last.

In alten Häusern, viele Mäuse; in alten Pelzen, viele Läuse. In
old houses many mice, in old furs many lice.

In armer Leute Mund verdirbt viel Weisheit. Much wisdom is lost
in poor men’s mouths.

In der einen Hand Brot, in der anderen einen Stein. Bread in one
hand, a stone in the other.

In der Mühle ist das Beste, daß die Säcke nicht reden können.
The best of the mill is that the sacks can’t speak.

In die Hölle kommt man mit größerer Mühe, als in den Himmel. It
is harder work getting to hell than to heaven.

In jedem Pfäfflein steckt ein Päbstlein. Every priestling
conceals a popeling.

Indessen das Gras wächst, verhungert der Gaul. Whilst the grass
grows the steed starves.

Irren ist menschlich. To err is human (to forgive, divine).

Irrender Hirt, irrende Schaafe. Straying shepherd, straying
sheep.

Irrthum ist kein Betrug. Erring is not cheating. (A mistake is
no fraud.)

Ist der Mensch geboren so fängt er an zu sterben. As soon as man
is born he begins to die.

Ist die Wirthin schön, ist auch der Wein schön. If the landlady
is fair, the wine is fair.


J.

Jacobs Stimme, Esaus Hände. Jacob’s voice, Esau’s hands.

Je älter der Geck, je schlimmer. The older a fool, the worse he
is. (There is no fool like an old fool.)

Je älter, je kälter; je kärger, je ärger. The older, the colder;
the more avaricious, the more vicious.

Je ärger der Mahner, je schlimmer der Zahler. The worse the dun,
the worse the paymaster.

Je fetter der Floh, je magerer der Hund. The fatter the flea,
the leaner the dog.

Je früher reif, je früher faul. Soon ripe, soon rotten.

Je gröter Hast, je minder Spood. (_Hamburg_.) The more haste,
the less speed.

Je höher der Affe steigt, je mehr er den Hintern zeigt. The
higher the ape climbs, the more he shows his rump.

Je höher die Glocke hängt, je heller sie klingt. The higher the
bell is hung, the shriller it sounds.

Je mehr der Brunnen gebraucht wird, desto mehr giebt er Wasser.
The more the well is used, the more water it yields.

Je mehr Gesetze, je weniger Recht. The more law, the less
justice.

Je mehr man den Dreck rüttelt, je mehr stinkt er. The more you
stir the mire, the more it stinks.

Je näher dem Bein, je süßer das Fleisch. The nearer the bone,
the sweeter the flesh.

Je näher der Herberge, je länger der Weg. The nearer the inn,
the longer the road.

Je näher der Kirche, je weiter von Gott. The nearer the church,
the farther from God.

Je schöner die Wirthin, je schwerer die Zeche. The fairer the
hostess, the heavier the reckoning.

Je später der Abend, je schöner die Leute. The later the
evening, the fairer the company.

Je voller das Faß, je gelinder der Klang. The fuller the cask,
the duller it’s sound.

Je weniger Worte, je besser Gebet. The fewer the words, the
better the prayer.

Jedem das Seine ist nicht zu viel. To every one his own is not
too much.

Jedem dünket sein’ Eul’ ein Falk. Every one thinks his owl a
falcon.

Jedem was, ist gut Theilung. Something to every one is good
division.

Jeder Arbeiter ist seines Lohnes werth. Every labourer is worthy
of his hire.

Jeder fege vor seiner Thür. Let every one sweep before his own
door.

Jeder für sich, Gott für Alle. Every man for himself, and God
for us all.

Jeder gilt so viel als er hat. Every one counts for as much as
he has.

Jeder hält sein Kupfer für Gold. Every man thinks his own copper
gold.

Jeder ist seiner Worte bester Ausleger. Every man is the best
interpreter of his own words.

Jeder ist seines Glückes Schmidt. Everybody is the architect of
his own fortune.

Jeder ist sich selbst der Nächste. Every man is dearest to
himself.

Jeder meint sein Kukuk singe besser denn des andern Nachtigall.
Every one thinks his own cuckoo sings better than another’s nightingale.

Jeder meint, was er im Sinne hat, das läuten alle Glocken. Every
one thinks that all the bells echo his own thoughts.

Jeder muß der Natur seine Schuld bezahlen. Every one must pay
his debt to nature.

Jeder muß ein Paar Narrenschuhen zerreißen, zerreißt er nicht
mehr. Everybody must wear out one pair of fool’s shoes, if he wear
no more.

Jeder Mutter Kind ist schön. Every mother’s child is handsome.

Jeder weiß es am Besten, wo ihn der Schuh drückt. Everybody
knows best where his own shoe pinches. (_Also Scotch._)

Jedermann sagt es, Niemand weiß es. Everybody says it, nobody
knows it.

Jedermanns Freund, Jedermanns Narr. Everybody’s friend,
everybody’s fool.

Jedermanns Gesell ist Niemands Freund. Everybody’s companion is
nobody’s friend.

Jedes Weib will lieber schön als fromm Sein. Every woman would
rather be handsome than good.

Jucken und Borgen thut wohl—aber nicht lang. Scratching and
borrowing do well enough, but not for long.

Jung Weib ist altem Mann, das Postpferd zum Grabe. A young wife
is an old man’s post-horse to the grave.

Junger Schlemmer, alter Bettler. A glutton young, a beggar old.

Junger Spieler, alter Bettler. Young gambler, old beggar.

Juristen sind böse Christen. Lawyers are bad Christians.


K.

Käs’ ist Morgens Gold, Mittags Silber, Abends Blei. Cheese is
gold in the morning, silver at noon, and lead at night.

Käs’] und Brot macht die Wangen roth. Cheese and bread make the
cheeks red.

Kalte Hand, warmes Herz. Cold hand, a warm heart.

Kartenspiel ist des Teufels Gebetbuch. A pack of cards is the
devil’s prayer-book.

Kauf bedarf hundert Augen, Verkauf hat an einem genug. Buyers
want a hundred eyes, sellers only one.

Kauf ist Kauf. A bargain is a bargain.

Kaufe deines Nachbars Rind, und freie deines Nachbars Kind. Buy
your neigbour’s ox, and woo your neighbour’s daughter.

Kaufen ist wohlfeiler als Bitten. Buying is cheaper than asking.

Kein Aff’, er schwört, er habe die schönsten Kinder. No ape but
swears he has the handsomest children.

Kein Baum fällt auf den ersten Schlag. No tree falls at the
first stroke.

Kein Ding ist so schlecht, daß es nicht zu etwas nützen sollte.
There is nothing so bad but may be of some use.

Kein Gefängniß schön, und keine Braut häßlich. Never seemed
prison fair, or mistress foul.

Kein Haus ohne Maus, keine Scheuer ohne Korn, keine Rose ohne
Dorn. No house without a mouse, no barn without corn, no rose
without a thorn.

Kein Kreuzer, kein Schweizer. No money, no Swiss.

Kein Panzer hilft wider den Galgen. No armour is proof against
the gallows.

Kein Rauch ohne Feuer. No smoke without fire.

Keiner ist so klug, daß er nicht ein wenig Narrheit übrig hätte.
Nobody so wise but has a little folly to spare.

Keiner kann Nichts, und Keiner kann Alles. No one can do
nothing, and no one can do everything.

Keines Mannes Herr, keines Herrn Mann. No man’s master, no
master’s man.

Kinder und Narren sagen die Wahrheit. Children and fools speak
the truth.

Kleine Diebe henkt man, vor großen zieht man den Hut ab. We hang
little thieves, and take off our hats to great ones.

Kleine Feinde und kleine Wunden sind nicht zu verachten. Little
enemies and little wounds are not to be despised.

Kleine Fische machen die Hechte groß. Little fishes make the
pike big.

Kleine Häfen laufen bald über. Little pots soon run over.

Kleine Heilige thun auch Zeichen. Small saints too work miracles.

Kleiner Profit und oft, ist besser wie großer und selten. Small
profits and often, are better than large profits and seldom.

Kluge Hühner legen auch in die Nesseln. Knowing hens lay even in
nettles.

Kluge Männer suchen wirthliche Frauen. Prudent men choose frugal
wives.

Könnte man jedes Ding zweimal machen, so stünd es besser in allen
Sachen. Could everything be done twice, everything would be done
better.

Krankes Fleisch, krankes Geist. Sickly body, sickly mind.

Kraue mich, so krau’ ich dich. Claw me, and I’ll claw thee.

Krummes Holz brennt eben so gut als gerades. Crooked wood burns
quite as well as straight.

Küsters Kuh darf auf dem Kirchhof grasen. The beadle’s cow may
graze in the churchyard.

Kunst hält bei einem Fest, wenn alles ihn verläßt. Art holds
fast when all else is lost.

Kurze Haare sind bald gebürstet. Short hair is soon brushed.

Kurze Rechnung, lange Freundschaft. Short reckoning makes long
friends.


L.

Lade nicht alles in Ein Schiff. Do not ship all in one bottom.

Ländlich, sittlich. So many countries, so many customs.

Lang geborgt ist nicht geschenkt. Long borrowed is not given.

Lange fasten ist nicht Brotsparen. Long fasting is no economy of
food.

Lange ist nicht ewig. Long is not for ever.

Langsam und gut. Slow and sure.

Laß deine Rechte nicht wissen, was deine Linke thut. Let not thy
right hand know what thy left hand doeth.

Laß den Gast ziehen ehe das Gewitter ausbricht. Let the guest go
before the storm bursts.

Laß die Leute reden und die Hunde bellen. Let people talk and
dogs bark.

Läßt man den Teufel in die Kirche, so will er auf den Altar. Let
the devil get into the church, and he will mount the altar.

Lasset die Todten ruhen. Let the dead rest.

Leben und leben lassen. Live and let live.

Leere Tonnen geben großen Schall. Empty casks make the most
sound.

Leichenpredigt, Lügenpredigt. Funeral sermon, lying sermon.

Leichte Bürden werden ferne schwer. Light burdens carried far
become heavy.

Leichte Magen, schwerer Sinn. A light belly, heavy heart.

Licht ist Licht, wenn’s gleich der Blinde nicht sieht. Light is
light, though the blind man see it not.

Lieb ohne Gegenliebist wie eine Frage ohne Antwort. Love without
return is like a question without an answer.

Liebe deinen Nachbar, reiß aber den Zaun nicht ein. Love your
neighbour, but don’t pull down the fence.

Liebe, Diebe und Furchtsamkeit, machen Gespenster. Love,
thieves, and fear, make ghosts.

Liebe fängt bei sich selber an. Love begins at home.

Liebe, Feuer, Huften, Krätze, Gicht, lassen sich verbergen
nicht. Love, fire, couch, the itch, and gout are not to be
concealed.

Liebe kann viel, Geld kann Alles. Love can do much, money can do
all.

Lieb wächst durch Kieb. Love grows with obstacles. (A wall
between increases love.)

Liebe weiß verborgene Wege. Love knows hidden paths.

Lieben und Husten lassen sich nicht verbergen. Love and a cough
cannot be hid.

Lieben und Singen läßt sich nicht zwingen. Loving and singing
are not to be forced.

Lieber biegen als brechen. Better bend than break.

Lieber Neid denn Mitleid. Better envy than pity.

Liebeszorn ist neuer Liebeszunder. Love’s anger is fuel to love.

Ließe der Wolf sein Laufen, das Volk ließe sein Rufen. If the
wolf would cease his running, the people would cease their shouting.

List gegen List. Trick against trick.

List geht über Gewalt. Cunning surpasses strength.

Loben ist nicht lieben. Praising is not loving.

Lösche das Feuer bei Zeiten, ehe es zum Dache hinausschlägt. Put
out the fire betimes, ere it reach the roof.

Lösche das Licht aus, so sind alle Weiber gleich. Put the light
out, and all women are alike.

Lüge ist die erste Staffel zum Galgen. Lying is the first step
to the gallows.

Lügen haben kurze Beine. Lies have short legs.

Lügen zerschmelzen wie Schnee. Lies melt like snow.

Lügner muß ein gutes Gedächtniß haben. Liars should have good
memories.


M.

Mach dich nicht zu hoch, die Thür ist niedrig. Don’t carry your
head too high, the door is low.

Mädchen sagen Nein und thun es doch. Maidens say no, and mean
yes. (Maids say nay, and take.)

Man darf nur sterben um gelobt zu werden. One has only to die to
be praised.

Man disputirt mehr über die Schaal, als über den Kern. There is
more disputing about the shell than the kernel.

Man giebt dem Hunde nicht so oft Brot, als er mit dem Schwanze
wedelt. The dog does not get bread every time he wags his tail.

Man kann durch eine Wand sehen, wenn ein Loch darin ist. One may
see through a wall, if there’s a hole in it.

Man kann Gold zu theuer kaufen. One may buy gold too dear.

Man küßt das Kind wegen der Mutter und die Mutter wegen des
Kindes. One kisses the child for the mother’s sake, and the mother
for the child’s sake.

Man murmelt so lange von einem Dinge, bis es geschieht.
Long-talked-of (or looked-for) comes at last.

Man muß das Eisen schmieden wann es warm ist. Strike while the
iron is hot.

Man muß die Katze nicht im Sacke kaufen. Don’t buy a cat in a
bag.

Man muß entweder ein König oder ein Narr geboren werden. One
should be born either a king or a fool.

Man muß Heu machen, weil die Sonne scheint. Make hay while the
sun shines.

Man muß mit den Pferden pflügen, die man hat. One must plough
with the horses one has.

Man muß mit Pfaffen nicht anfangen oder sie todtschlagen. Either
fight not with priests or beat them to death.

Man muß sein Licht nicht unter Scheffel stellen. Hide not your
light under a bushel.

Man muß sich strecken nach der Decken. Stretch your legs
according to your coverlet.

Man muß unreines Wasser nicht eher weggießen bis man reines hat.
Don’t throw away your dirty water till you have got clean.

Man schlägt auf der Sack und meint den Müller. We beat the sack
and mean the miller.

Man soll die Beute nicht vor dem Siege theilen. Don’t divide the
spoil before the victory is won.

Man soll die Zeche nicht ohne den Wirth machen. Don’t reckon
without your host.

Man soll nicht aus der Schule schwatzen. Tell no tales out of
school.

Man soll nicht mehr Teufel rufen als man bannen kann. Raise no
more devils than you can lay.

Man spart am Zapfen und läßt’s am Spundloch auslaufen. To save
at the spiggot, and let it run out at the bung-hole. (_Also Scotch._)

Man spricht, an vielerlei Leuten ist Mangel auf Erden: an Pfaffen,
sonst dürfte einer nicht sechs bis sieben Pründen; an Adelichen, sonst
wollte nicht jeder Bauer ein Junker sein; an Huren, sonst würden das
Handwerk Eheweiber und Nonnen nicht treiben; an Juden, sonst würden
Christen nicht wuchern. Folks say there is a lack of four sorts
of people on earth: of priests, else one would not have six or seven
benefices; of gentlemen, else every boor would not want to be a squire;
of whores, else married women and nuns would not carry on the trade; of
Jews, else Christians would not practise usury. (_Trench quotes this as
the longest Proverb known._)

Man verändert sich oft und bessert sich selten. People often
change and seldom for the better.

Mann kann nicht länger Frieden halten, als der Nachbar will. One
cannot keep peace longer than his neighbour will let him.

Mann muß kaufen wenn es Markt ist. Buy when it is market time.

Mann ohne Weib, ist Haupt ohne Leib; Weib ohne Mann, ist Leib ohne
Haupt daran. Man without woman, is head without body; woman without
man, is body without head.

Man muß sammeln wenn die Ernte da ist. One must glean at harvest
time.

Man thut geschwind was lange gereut. We do in haste what we
repent at leisure. (Marry in haste, and repent at leisure.)

Man weiß wohl was man hat, aber nicht was man bekommt. We know
what we have, but not what we shall get.

Manche gute Kuh hat ein übel Kalb. Many a good cow has a bad
calf.

Mancher droht und zittert vor Furcht. Many a one threatens,
while he quakes for fear.

Mancher flieht einen Bach, und fällt in den Rhein. Many shun the
brook, and fall into the river.

Mancher geht nach Wolle aus und kommt geschoren selbst nach
Haus. Many go out for wool, and come home shorn.

Mancher hat was Gutes im Sinne, dem was Schlechtes in den Weg
kommt. Many have good intentions, but something comes across them.

Mancher hütet sich vor dem Schwert und kommt an den Galgen. Many
shun the sword, and come to the gallows.

Mancher nimmt mit Scheffeln und giebt mit Löffeln. Many take by
the bushel, and give with the spoon.

Mancher sieht mit einem Auge mehr als ein Anderer mit zweien.
Many see more with one eye than others with two.

Mancher sucht einen Pfennig, und verbrennt dabei ein Pfund.
Penny wise, and pound foolish.

Maulesel treiben viel Parlaren daß ihre Voreltern Pferde waren.
Mules make a great fuss about their ancestors having been horses.

Meines Freundes Feind ist oft mein bester Freund. My friend’s
enemy is often my best friend.

Mißrechnung ist keine Zahlung. Misreckoning is no payment.

”Mit allem Pläsir,” sagt der Bauer, wenn er muß. “With great
pleasure,” says the boor, when he must.

Mit beiden Beinen im Stock oder mit Einem, ist gleich viel. Both
legs in the stocks or only one, ’tis all the same.

Mit dem Pfeiflein gewonnen, mit dem Trommlein verthan. Got with
the fife, spent with the drum.

Mit der Mutter soll beginnen, wer die Tochter will gewinnen. Who
the daughter would win, with mamma must begin.

Mit einem Handwerk kommt man weiter als mit tausend Gulden. A
good trade will carry farther than a thousand florins.

Mit einem Tropfen Honig fängt man mehr Fliegen als mit einem Oxhoft
Essig. A drop of honey catches more flies than a hogshead of
vinegar.

Mit Geduld und Zeit wird’s Maulbeerblatt zum Atlas-Kleid. With
patience and time the mulberry leaf becomes a silk gown.

Mit gleicher Münze zahlen. Pay in like coin.

Mit großen Herren ist nicht gut Kirschen essen, sie werfen Einem die
Stein’ und Stiel’ ins Angesicht. They who eat cherries with the
great, are like to have the stones and stalks flung in their face.

Mit Hunden fängt man Hasen, mit Lob die Narren und mit Geld die
Frauen. Hares are caught with hounds, fools with praise, and women
with gold.

Mit leerer Hand ist schwer Vögel fangen. It is hard to catch
birds with an empty hand.

Mit Schweigen verräth sich Niemand. No one betrays himself by
silence.

Mit Worten richtet man mehr aus als mit Händen. More is done
with words than with hands.

Mittelweg ein sichrer Steg. The middle path is the safe path.

Mönch ins Kloster, Fisch ins Wasser, Dieb an’n Galgen. A monk in
his cloister, a fish in the water, a thief on the gallows.

Mönche, Mäuse, Ratten, Maden, scheiden selten ohne zuschaden].
Monks, mice, rats, and vermin, seldom sunder without harming.

Morgenstunde hat Gold im Munde. The morning hour has gold in its
mouth.

Müde Ochsen treten hart. Tired oxen tread hard.

Müller, Schneider und Weber, werden nicht gehenkt, das Handwerk
gienge sonst aus. Millers, tailors, and weavers are not hanged, or
the trade would soon be extinct.

Müller und Bäcker stehlen nicht, man bringt’s ihnen. Millers and
bakers do not steal, people bring to them.

Müllers Henn’ und Wittwers Magd hat selten über Noth geklagt.
The miller’s hen and widower’s maid, of want need never be afraid.

Mund und Herz sind eine ganze Spanne von einander. Mouth and
heart are wide apart.

Muß ist eine harte Nuß. Must is a hard nut.

Müßiggang ist aller Laster Anfang. Idleness is the root of all
evil.

Müßiggang ist des Teufels Ruhebank. An idle brain is the devil’s
workshop.

Mutter, ich muß einen Mann ha’n, oder ich zünd’s Haus an.
Mother, I must have a husband, or I shall set fire to the house.

Muttertreu wird täglich neu. Mother’s truth keeps constant
youth.


N.

Nach dem Essen sollst du stehen, oder tausend Schritte gehen.
After dinner stand a while, or walk nearly half a mile.

Nach Regen kommt Sonnenschein. After rain comes sunshine.

Nach Weihnachten kommt Fasten. After Christmas comes Lent.

Nachbar über den Zaun, Nachbar wieder herüber. Neighbour once
over the hedge, neighbour over it again.

Nachgeben stillt allen Krieg. Yielding stays war.

Nachher ist jeder klug. Every one is wise after the event.

Narren bauen Häuser, der Kluge kauft sie. Fools build houses,
wise men buy them.

Narren Bolzen ist bald verschossen. A fool’s bolt is soon shot.

Narren soll man nicht auf Eier setzen. Fools must not be set on
eggs.

Narren wachsen unbegossen”P2:old/typo: unbegießen?
P3:unbegossen]. Fools grow without being watered.

Natur begiert wenig, Wahn viel. Nature requires little, fancy
much.

Natur und Liebe lassen sich nicht bergen. Nature and love cannot
be hid.

Natur zieht stärker denn sieben Ochsen. Nature draws stronger
than seven oxen.

Neben dem Fluß einen Brunnen bohren. To sink a well by the river
side.

Neid neidet sich selbst. Envy envies itself.

Neue Besen kehren gut. New brooms sweep clean.

Neue Kirchen und neue Wirthshäuser stehen selten leer. New
churches and new taverns are seldom empty.

Neue Liedlein singt man gern. New songs are eagerly sung.

Neuem Gesetze folgt neuer Betrug. New laws, new roguery.

Neuer Arzt, neuer Kirchhof. New doctor, new churchyard.

Neukommen, willkommen. New come, welcome.

Neutrale wollen auf Eiern gehen und keines zertreten. Neutrals
think to tread on eggs and break none.

Nicht alle Blumen taugen zum Sträußchen. Not all flowers are fit
for nosegays.

Nicht alle Kugeln treffen. Not every ball hits.

Nicht alle sind Diebe, die der Hund anbellt. All are not thieves
whom the dog barks at.

Nicht jeder Glühwurm ist Feuer. Every glow-worm is not fire.
(Every light is not the sun.)

Nicht jedes Land hat alles zur Hand. Not every land has all at
hand.

Nicht zu wenig, nicht zu viel. Not too little, not too much.

Nichts braucht keine Schlupfwinkel. Nought needs no hiding-place.

Nichts ist gut für die Augen, aber nicht für den Magen. Nought
is good for the eyes, but not for the stomach.

Nichts ist so neu, als was längst vergessen ist. Nothing is so
new as what has long been forgotten.

Nichts kühner als der Müller Hemd, das jeden Morgen einen Dieb beim
Kragen nimmt. Nothing bolder than the miller’s shirt, that every
morning collars a thief.

Nichts mit Hast als Flöhe fangen. Nothing should be done in a
hurry except catching fleas.

Nichts sieht einem gescheidten Mann ähnlicher als ein Narr der das
Maul hält. Nothing looks more like a man of sense than a fool who
holds his tongue.

Nichts thun lehrt Uebel thun. Doing nothing teaches doing ill.

Nichts vertrocknet balder als Thränen. Nothing dries sooner than
tears.

Nichts wiegt leichter als ein Versprechen. Nothing weighs
lighter than a promise.

Niemand hat sich über’s Meer zu beklagen, der zum zweiten Male
Schiffbruch litt. No one can complain of the sea who twice suffers
shipwreck.

Niemand ist klug genug sich zu rathen. No one is wise enough to
advise himself.

Niemand kann zugleich blasen und schlucken. No one can blow and
swallow at the same time.

Niemand kann zweien Herren dienen. No man can serve two masters.

Niemand sieht seine eigene Fehler. No one sees his own faults.

Nimm die Welt wie sie ist, nicht wie sie seyn sollte. Take the
world as it is, not as it ought to be.

Nimmer Geld, nimmer Gesell. No penny, no paternoster.

Noth bricht Eisen. Necessity breaks iron.

Noth kennt kein Gebot. Necessity has no law.

Noth lehrt auch den Lahmen tanzen. Necessity teaches even the
lame to dance.

Noth lehrt Künste. Necessity teaches arts.

Noth sucht Brod wo es sich findet. Necessity seeks bread where
it is to be found.

Noth vereinigt Herzen. Necessity unites hearts.

Nüchtern gedacht, voll gesagt. Thought when sober, said when
drunk.

Nur Einer kann Kaiser sein. Only one can be emperor.

Nürenberger Witz und künstliche Hand finden Wege durch alle
Land. Nurenberg wit and a skilful hand, will find their way through
every land.


O.

”O was müßen wir der Kirche Gottes halber leiden!” rief der Abt, als
ihm das gebratene Huhn die Finger versengt. “O what we must suffer
for the sake of God’s church!” said the abbot, when the roast fowl
burned his fingers.

Ochs, wart’ des Grases. Ox, keep to your grass.

Offene Hand macht offene Hand. Open hand makes open hand.

Oft schießen trifft das Ziel. Often shooting hits the mark.

Ohne Eifersucht keine Liebe. No jealousy, no love.

Ohne Mehl und Wasser ist übel backen. It is bad baking without
flour and water.

Ohne Wissen, ohne Sünde. Without knowledge, without sin.

Ost und West, daheim das Best. East or west, home is best.


P.

Pfaffen lachen junge Weiber auch gern an. Priests even smile
pleasantly on young women.

Pfaffen und Weiber vergessen nie. Priests and women never forget.

Pfaffen segnen sich zuerst. Priests bless themselves first.

Pfaffen sollen nicht aus der Beichte schwatzen. Priests should
not prate out of the confessional.

Pfaffen zahlen einander keine Zehnten. Priests pay each other no
tithes.

Pfaffenknechte essen mit Schweiß, von Arbeit werden sie nicht
heiß. Priestly knaves sweat hard at their meat, but never at work
get into a heat.

Pfau, schau deine Beine. Peacock, look at your legs.

Pfennig ist Pfennigs Bruder. Penny is penny’s brother.

Pflanze oft versetzt, gedeihet nicht. Plants oft removed never
thrive.

Pflaumen kann man nicht zu Aepfeln machen. There’s no making
apples of plums.

Pillen muß man schlingen, nicht kauen. Pills must be bolted, not
chewed.


R.

Rache bleibt nicht ungerochen. Revenge remains not unrevenged.

Rache ist neues Unrecht. Revenge is new wrong.

Rache macht ein kleines Recht zu großem Unrecht. Revenge
converts a little right into a great wrong.

Rappelige Räder laufen am längsten. Crazy wheels run longest.

”Rast ich, so rost ich,” sagt der Schlüssel. “If I rest, I
rust,” says the key.

Rath soll vor der That gehen. Advice should precede the act.

Rathe Niemand ungebeten. Never give advice unasked.

Rathen ist leichter denn helfen. Advising is easier than helping.

Rathen ist nicht zwingen. Advice is not compulsion.

Rathen ist oft besser denn fechten. Advising is often better
than fighting.

Raubvögel singen nicht. Birds of prey do not sing.

Rechten und borgen macht Kummer und Sorgen. Disputing and
borrowing cause grief and sorrowing.

Rede, daß ich dich sehe. Speak, that I may see thee.

Rede wenig, rede wahr. Zehre wenig, zahl baar. Speak little,
speak truth. Spend little, pay cash.

Reden ist leichter als thun, und versprechen leichter als
halten. Talking is easier than doing, and promising than performing.

Reden ist Silber, Schweigen ist Gold. Talking is silver, silence
is gold.

Reden kommt von Natur, Schweigen vom Verstande. Speaking comes
by nature, silence by understanding.

Reich ist genug, wer sich genügen läßt. He is rich enough who is
contented.

Reiche Leute sind überall daheim. Rich people are everywhere at
home.

Reiche Spieler und alte Trompeter sind selten. Rich gamblers and
old trumpeters are rare.

Reichen giebt man, Armen nimmt man. We give to the rich, and
take from the poor.

Reiner Mund und treue Hand, gehen durch das ganze Land. A clean
mouth and honest hand, will take a man through any land.

Reu, des Herzens Arznei. Repentance is the heart’s medicine.

Richter sollen zwei gleiche Ohren haben. Judges should have two
ears, both alike.

Rom ward nicht in einem Tage gebaut. Rome was not built in a day.

Rosen kann nicht jedermann pflücken. Not every one may pluck
roses.

Rosen und Jungfern sind bald verblättert. Roses and maidens soon
lose their bloom.

”Roth ist die Farbe der Liebe,” sagte der Buhler zu seinem
fuchsfarbenen Schatz. “Red is Love’s colour,” said the wooer to his
foxy charmer.

Rücke nicht, wenn du wohl sitzest. Don’t budge, if you sit at
ease.

Rufe nicht “Juch!” bis du über den Graben bist. Don’t cry
“Hurra!” till you are over the ditch.

Ruh kommt aus Unruh, und wieder Unruh aus Ruh. Rest comes from
unrest, and unrest from rest.


S.

Sänger, Buhler und Poeten, lügen viel. Singers, lovers, and
poets, are privileged liars.

Sag eine Lüge, so hörst du die Wahrheit. Tell a lie, and you’ll
hear the truth.

Sage nicht Alles, was du weißt; glaube nicht Alles, was du hörst;
thue nicht Alles, was du kanst. Tell not all you know; believe not
all you hear; do not all you are able.

Sagen und Thun ist zweierlei. Saying and doing are two things.

Salz und Brot macht die Wangen roth. Salt and bread make the
cheeks red.

Sammt und Seide löschen das Feuer in der Küche aus. Silk and
velvet put out the kitchen fire.

Samson war ein starker Mann, aber er konnte nicht zahlen ehe er Geld
hatte. Samson was a strong man, but he could not pay money before
he had it.

Sanct Martin war ein milder man, trank gerne Cerevisiam; und hat er
kein Pecuniam, so ließ er seine Tunicam. Saint Martin was an easy
man, he loved to drink _Cerevisiam_; and when he’d no _Pecuniam_, he
left in pledge his _Tunicam_.

Schälke muß man mit Schälken fangen. Set a thief to catch a
thief.

Schäme dich deines Handwerks nicht. Be not ashamed of your craft.

Schein betrügt. Appearances are deceitful.

Scherze nicht mit Ernst. Jest not in earnest. (_Motto of the
Margrave of Brandenburg._)

Schick dich in die Zeit. Suit yourself to the times.

Schlachte nicht mehr als du wohl kannst salzen. Slaughter no
more than you can well salt.

Schlafende Hunde soll man nicht wecken. Wake not a sleeping dog.

Schlecht gefahren ist besser als stolz zu Fuß. Better badly
mounted than proud on foot.

Schlechtes Geld kommt immer wieder. Bad money always comes back.

Schlimmer Anfang bringt wohl gutes Ende. A bad beginning may
make a good ending.

Schloß und Schlüssel macht man nicht für treue Finger. Locks and
keys are not made for honest fingers.

Schmeichler sind Katzen die vorne lecken und hinten kratzen.
Flatterers are cats that lick before and scratch behind.

Schnell genug, wär’s gut genug. Quick enough, if but good enough.

Schnell Glück, schnell Unfall. Speedy rise, speedy fall. (Sudden
glory soon goes out.)

Schön ist, was schön thut. Handsome is that handsome does.

Schöne Aepfel sind auch wohl sauer. Handsome apples are
sometimes sour.

Schöne Blumen stehen nicht lange am Wege. Fair flowers do not
remain long by the wayside.

Schöne Worte füllen den Sack nicht. Fair words don’t fill the
pocket.

Schöne Worte gemacht, ist halb verkauft. Words fine and bold,
are goods half sold.

Schöne Worte machen den Kohl nicht fett. Fair words don’t butter
the cabbage.

Schönen Tag soll man loben, wann es Nacht ist. Praise a fine day
at night.

Schrei nicht Juchhe! bis du über den Zaun bist. Don’t cry hurra!
till you are over the hedge (till you are out of the wood).

Schreibe dem Teufel auf ein Horn: “guter Engel!” und manche
glaubens. Write on one of the devil’s horns, “Good angel,” and many
will believe it.

Schuster bleib bei deinem Leisten. Shoemaker stick to your last.

Schwarze Kühe geben auch weiße Milch. Black cows give white milk.

Schweig, ober rede etwas, das besser ist denn Schweigen. Be
silent, or say something better than silence.

Schweigen und Denken kann Niemand kränken. Silence and
reflection cause no dejection.

Schweigender Hund beißt am ersten. The silent dog is the first
to bite.

Schweißwasser giebt guten Mörtel. Sweat makes good mortar.

Sei Hur ober Dieb, hast du Geld so bist du lieb. Whore or thief,
young or old, welcome so you’ve got the gold.

Seine Hühner legen Eier die zwei Dotter haben. His hens lay eggs
with two yolks.

Selbst gethan, ist bald gethan. Self-done, is soon done. (Never
trust to another what you should do yourself.)

Selbst ist der Mann. Self is the man.

Selten kommt Besser nach. A better seldom comes after.

Senf nach der Tafel. After meat comes mustard.

Setzt einen Frosch auf goldenen Stuhl, er hüpft doch wieder in den
Pfuhl. Though you seat the frog on a golden stool, he’ll soon jump
off again into the pool.

Sey, was du seyn willst. Be the thing you would be called. (Be
as you would seem to be.)

Sicherheit ist des Unglücks erste Ursache. Security is the first
cause of misfortune.

Sicherheit ist nirgends sicher. Security is nowhere safe.

Sie hat ihn lieb—auf der Seite wo die Tasche hängt. She is fond
of him—on the side where the pocket hangs.

Sie streiten um ein Ei, und lassen die Henne fliegen. They
wrangle about an egg, and let the hens fly away.

Siedet der Topf, so blühet die Freundschaft. While the pot
boils, friendship blooms.

Siegen kommt nicht vom Liegen. Victory is not gained by idleness.

Siehe erst auf dich, dann richte mich. First look at home, then
censure me.

Sieht doch wohl die Katze den Kaiser an. A cat may look at a
king.

Sieht man’s, so spiel ich; sieht man’s nicht, so stiehl ich. If
I am seen, I am joking; if I am not seen, I steal.

So geht es in der Welt: der Eine hat den Beutel, der Andere hat das
Geld. So it goes in the world: one has the purse, the other has the
gold.

So mancher Mensch, so manche Sitte. So many countries, so many
customs.

Sobald Gesetze ersonnen, wird Betrug begonnen. As fast as laws
are devised, their evasion is contrived.

Sohnesweib haßt Mannesmutter. Daughter-in-law hates
mother-in-law.

Soldaten muß man wohl zahlen und wohl henken. Soldiers must be
well paid, and well hanged.

Soll die Ampel brennen, so muß man Oel zugießen. If you would
have the lamp burn, you must pour oil into it.

Soll ich ersaufen, so muß es in saubern Wasser seyn. If I am to
be drowned, it shall be in clean water.

Sollten alle Ehebrecher graue Röcke tragen, so würde das Tuch
theuer. Were all adulterers to wear grey coats, the cloth would be
dear.

Sommersaat und Weiberrath geräth alle sieben Jahre einmal.
Summer sown corn and women’s advice turn out well once in every seven
years.

Sorgen macht graue Haare und Alter ohne Jahre. Care brings on
grey hairs, and age without years.

Sparen ist größere Kunst als erwerben. Saving is a greater art
than gaining.

Spät Obst liegt lange. Late fruit keeps well.

Spitzig’ Kinn, böser Sinn. There’s cunning in a pointed chin.

Stetes tropfen höhlt den Stein. Constant dropping wears the
stone.

Starke Leute haben starke Krankheit. Strong folks have strong
maladies.

Starker Leute Spiel ist kranker Leute Todt. The strong man’s
sport is the sickly man’s death.

Steckenpferde sind theuerer als arabische Hengste. Hobby horses
are dearer than Arabians.

Stehend’ Wasser wird stinkend. Stagnant water grows stinking.

Stelle und Stunde machen einen Dieb. Time and place make the
thief.

Stille Wasser sind tief. Still waters run deep.

Strecke dich nach der Decke. Stretch yourself according to your
coverlid. (Cut your coat according to your cloth.)

Stumme Hunde und stille Wasser sind gefährlich. Dumb dogs and
still water are dangerous.

Süßer Gesang hat manchen betrogen. Sweet song has betrayed many.

Süßer Wein giebt sauern Essig. Sweet wine makes sour vinegar.


T.

Tadeln ist leicht, besser machen ist schwer. It is easier to
blame than do better.

Tadeln kann ein jeder Bauer, besser machen wird ihm sauer. Every
clown can find fault, though it would puzzle him to do better.

Tapfer angegriffen ist halb gefochten. A bold onset is half the
battle.

Tauben Ohren ist bös prediger. It is bad preaching to deaf ears.

Tausch ist kein Raub. Exchange is no robbery.

Teufel muß man mit Teufeln austreiben. Devils must be driven out
with devils.

Theure Arznei hilft immer, wenn nicht dem Kranken doch dem
Apotheker. Dear physic always does good, if not to the patient, at
least to the apothecary.

Theurer Honig, den man aus Dornen muß lecken. It is dear honey
that must be licked off thorns.

Thue was du thuest. Do what thou doest. (Age quod agis.)

Todte Hunde beißen nicht. Dead dogs don’t bite.

Töchter sind leicht zu erziehen, aber schwer zu verheirathen.
Daughters are easy to rear, but hard to marry.

Trage Jeder seinen Sack zur Mühle. Let every man carry his own
sack to the mill.

Trau-wohl hat die Kuh gestohlen. Good faith stole the cow.

Trau-wohl, reit’ das Pferd hinweg. Trust well rides away with
the horse.

Traue, aber nicht zu viel. Trust, but not too much.

Traue keinem, du habest denn einen Scheffel Salz mit ihm
gegessen. Trust no one till you have eaten a bushel of salt with
him.

Traue, schaue Wem! Trust, beware whom!

Träume sind Schäume. Dreams are froth.

Treue ist ein seltener Gast, halt ihn fest, wo du ihn hast. Good
faith is a seldom guest, when you have him, hold him fast.

Trinkt eine Gans, so trinken sie alle. When one goose drinks,
all drink.

Tritt der Kummer in’s Haus, fliegt die Liebe zum Fenster hinaus.
When misfortune comes in at the door, love flies out of the window.

Trunken klug, nüchtern närrisch. The wise drunkard is a sober
fool.

Trunkener Mund redet aus Herzens Grund. The drunken mouth
reveals the heart’s secrets.

Tugend leidet oft Noth, aber nicht den Tod. Virtue never dies.

Tugend überwindet Gewalt. Virtue subdues power.

Tugend wächst im Unglück. Virtue flourishes in misfortune.


U.

Uebel Botschaft kommt immer zu früh. Bad tidings always come too
soon.

Uebel gewonnen, übel zerronnen. Ill got, ill spent.

Uebel Henne, die in Nachbars Häuser legt. It is a bad hen that
lays in neighbours’ houses.

Ueberfluß bringt Ueberdruß. Satiety causes disgust. (Abundance
begets indifference.)

Uebung bringt Kunst. Practice makes perfect.

Uebung macht den Meister. Practice makes the master.

Um des Kindes willen küsset man die Amme. One kisses the nurse
for the sake of the child.

Umkehren ist besser als irre gehen. It is better to turn back
than go astray.

Undank ist der Welt Lohn. Ingratitude is the world’s reward.

Undank macht wohlthun krank. Ingratitude sickens benevolence.

Ungebetener Dienst hat keinen Dank. Services unrequired go
unrequited.

Ungeladener Gast ist eine Last. The unbidden guest is ever a
pest.

Ungelegte Eier sind ungewisse Hühnlein. Unlaid eggs are
uncertain chickens.

Ungerechter Frieden ist besser als gerechter Krieg. Better an
unjust peace than a just war. (Better a lean peace than a fat victory.)

Ungerechter Pfennig verzehrt gerechten Thaler. The unrighteous
penny consumes the righteous dollar.

Unglück, Holz und Haar, wachsen alle Tage. Misfortune, wood, and
hair, grow throughout the year.

Unkraut vergeht nicht. Weeds never die.

Unmäßigkeit ist der Aerzte Säugamme. Intemperance is the
doctor’s wet-nurse.

Unrecht Gut thut nicht gut. Ill-gotten goods seldom prosper.

Unsers Nachbaren Kinder sind allweg die bösesten. Our
neighbour’s children are always the worst.

Unter den Blinden ist der Einäugige König. The one-eyed is a
king among the blind.

Unter zwei Uebeln muß man das kleinste wählen. Of two evils
choose the least.

Unverhofft kommt oft. Unlooked-for often comes.

Unzeitige Wahrheit ist einer Lüge gleich. Truth ill-timed is as
bad as a lie. (Truth should not always be revealed.)


V.

Verbotenes Obst ist süß. Forbidden fruit is sweet.

Vergeben ist nicht vergessen. Forgiven is not forgotten.

Vergieb und vergesse. Forgive and forget.

Verheißen macht Schuld. A promise is a debt.

Verletzen ist leicht, heilen schwer. ’Tis easier to hurt than
heal.

Verliebte Köchin versalzt die Speisen. A lovelorn cook oversalts
the porridge.

Verrath ist angenehm, Verräther verhaßt. The treason is loved,
the traitor hated.

Verraths kann sich Niemand erwehren. No one can guard against
treachery.

Verschlossener Mund und offene Augen haben Niemand was
geschadet. A close mouth and open eyes never did any one harm.

Verschoben ist nicht aufgehoben. Deferred is not annulled.
(Forbearance is no acquittance.)

Versengte Katzen leben lange. Singed cats live long.

Versprechen füllt den Magen nicht. Promises don’t fill the belly.

Versprechen ist Eins und halten ein Anderes. Promising is one
thing, performing another.

Verstand kommt nicht vor den Jahren. Reason does not come before
years.

Vertrauen weckt Vertrauen. Confidence begets confidence.

Verzagt’ Herz freit nimmer ein schön’ Weib. Faint heart never
won fair lady.

Verzagte Hunde bellen am meisten. Timid dogs bark most.

Verzeih dir nichts und Andern viel. Forgive thyself nothing and
others much.

Viel Geld, viele Freunde. Much money, many friends. (Where
money, there friends.)

”Viel Geschrei und wenig Wolle,” sagte der Narr und schor ein
Schwein. “Great cry and little wool,” said the fool, when he
sheared a pig.

Viel verthun und wenig erwerben ist der Weg um zu verderben. To
spend much and gain little is the sure road to ruin.

Viele Erben machen schmale Theile. Many heirs make small
portions.

Viele Freunde und wenige Nothhelfer. Many friends, and few
helpers in need.

Viele Hände machen bald ein Ende. Many hands make quick work.

Viele Handwerke, Betteln das Beste. Many trades, begging the
best.

Viele Hunde sind des Hasen Tod. Many hounds are the death of the
hare.

Viele Köche verderben den Brei. Many cooks spoil the broth.

Viele können Einem helfen. Many can help one.

Viele Köpfe, viele Sinne. So many men, so many minds.

Viele Prediger sind, die selbst nicht hören. There are many
preachers who don’t hear themselves.

Viele Säcke sind des Esels Tod. Too many sacks are the death of
the ass.

Viele Streiche fällen die Eiche. The repeated stroke will fell
the oak.

Vier Augen sehen mehr als zwei. Four eyes see more than two.

Von der Hand zum Munde, verschüttet mancher die Suppe. Between
the hand and the lip the soup may be spilt.

Von einem Funken kommt ein großes Feuer. A little spark kindles
a great fire.

Von einem Streiche fällt keine Eiche. A single stroke don’t fell
the oak.

Von fern lügt man gern. They who come from afar are prone to lie.

”Von Herzen gern!” sagt der Bauer, wenn er muß. “With all my
heart!” says the boor, when he must.

Von kleinem Grase wächst ein großes Thier. Out of a little grass
comes a great ass.

Von Worten zu Werken ein weiter Weg. Between wording and working
is a long road.

Vögel von gleichen Federn fliegen gern beisammen. Birds of a
feather flock together.

Volkes Stimme, Gottes Stimme. The people’s voice, God’s voice.

Volle Fässer klingen nicht. Full vessels give the least sound.

Vor lachenden Wirthinn und weinenden Pfaffen hüte dich. Beware
of laughing hosts and weeping priests.

Vor Liebe frißt der Wolf das Schaf. For love the wolf eats the
sheep.

Vorrath nimmer schadet. Store is no sore.

Vorrede spart Nachrede. Fore-talk spares after-talk.

Vorsicht schadet nicht. Safe bind, safe find.


W.

Wächst die Ehre spannenlang, wächst die Thorheit ellenlang.
Where honour grows a span, folly grows an ell.

Wahn erheischt viel, Noth bedarf wenig. Fancy requires much,
necessity but little.

Während das Gras wächst, ist der Hengst todt. While the grass
grows, the steed starves.

Wahrheit findet keine Herberge. Truth finds no asylum.

Wahrheit giebt kurzen Bescheid, Lüge macht viel Redens. Truth
gives a short answer, lies go round about.

Wahrheit ist der Zeit Tochter. Truth is the daughter of time.

Wahrheit kriecht in keine Mäuselöcher. Truth creeps not into
comers.

Wahrheit thut der Zunge weh. Truth makes the tongue smart.

Wahrheit wird wohl gedrückt, aber nicht erstickt. Truth may be
suppressed, but not strangled.

Wahrmanns Haus steht am längsten. Trueman’s house stands the
longest.

Wald hat Ohren, Feld hat Augen. Woods have ears, fields have
eyes.

Wallfahrer kommen selten heiliger nach Hause. Pilgrims seldom
come home saints.

Wälzender Stein wird nicht mooßig. A rolling stone gathers no
moss.

Wär’ ich ein Hutmacher worden, so kämen die Leut’ ohne Kopf zur
Welt. Were I a hatter, men would come into the world without heads.

Wäre Holzhauen ein Orden, wären nicht so viele Mönche geworden.
If wood-hewing were an order, there would be fewer monks.

Wären wir alle gescheidt, so gält’ ein Narr hundert Thaler. If
every one were wise, a fool would be the prize.

Wärme dich weil das Feuer brennt. Make hay while the sun shines.

Was bald reif, hält nicht steif. What ripens fast does not last.

Was das Auge nicht sieht, bekümmert das Herz nicht. What the eye
sees not, the heart rues not.

Was dem Einen recht ist, ist dem Andern billig. What is right
for the one is reasonable for the other.

Was den Raben gehört, ertrinkt nicht. What belongs to the ravens
is never drowned.

Was der Eine nicht backt, das brauet der Andere. What one does
not bake, another brews.

Was der Löwe nicht kann, das kann der Fuchs. What the lion
cannot, the fox can.

Was der Pfau am Kopfe zu wenig hat, hat er am Schwanze zu viel.
What the peacock has too little on his head, he has too much on his
tail.

Was die Augen sehen, glaubt das Herz. What the eyes see, the
heart believes.

Was die Fürsten geigen, müssen die Unterthanen tanzen. As
princes fiddle, subjects must dance.

Was dir zu hoch ist, daß laß fliegen. What is too high, that let
fly.

Was drei wissen, erfahren bald dreißig. What three know will
soon be known to thirty.

Was du dem Freunde leihest, das mahnt der Feind. What you lend
to a friend, an enemy sues for.

Was du thun willst, thue bald. What you do, do quickly.

Was Gott zusammenfügt, das soll der Mensch nicht scheiden. What
God hath joined together, let no man put asunder.

Was Hänschen nicht lernt, lernt Hans nimmer. What Master Jacky
does not learn, Mr. John never knows.

Was hilft laufen, wenn man nicht auf dem rechten Weg ist? What
is the use of running, when we are not on the right road?

Was hilft’s, daß die Kuh viel Milch giebt, wenn sie den Eimer
umstößt. Of what use is it that the cow gives plenty of milk, if
she upsets the pail.

Was! ich sollt einen Hund füttern und selbst bellen? What! keep
a dog and bark myself?

Was Jeder thun soll, thut Keiner. Everybody’s business is
nobody’s business.

Was keine Sünde, ist keine Schande. What is no sin, is no shame.

Was kümmert’s den Mond, wenn ihn die Hunde anbellen? What does
the moon care if the dogs bay at her?

Was man nicht am Heu hat, hat man am Stroh. What we want in hay
we make up in straw.

Was man nicht im Kopfe hat, muß man in den Leinen haben. Who
falls short in the head, must be long in the heels.

Was man nicht kann meiden, muß man willig leiden. What can’t be
cured, must be endured.

Was Menschenhände machen, können Menschenhände verderben. What
man has made, man can destroy.

Was nicht nimmt Christus, das nimmt Fiscus. What is not taken by
the Church is taken by the Exchequer.

Was nichts nützet ist geschenkt zu theuer. What’s of no use is
too dear at a gift.

Was Pfaffen beißen und Wölfe, ist schwer zu heilen. The bites of
priests and wolves are hard to heal.

Was schadet des Hundes bellen, der nicht beißt? What signifies
the barking of a dog that don’t bite?

Was schadet ein gut’ Wort? Braucht man’s doch nicht zu kaufen.
What harm is there in a good word? It costs nothing.

Was selten kommt, kommt wohl scharf. What comes seldom, comes
sharp.

Was soll der Honig in Esels Maule? What’s the use of putting
honey in an ass’s mouth.

Was von Herzen kommt, das geht zu Herzen. What comes from the
heart, goes to the heart.

Was wehe thut, das lehrt. What smarts, teaches.

Wasser in’s Meer tragen. To carry water to the sea.

Wasser ist das stärkste Getränk, es treibt Mühlen. Water is the
strongest drink; it drives mills.

Weiber findet man nimmer ohne Rede. Women are never at a loss
for words.

Weiber, Glück und Gold, sind allen Narren hold. Women, fortune,
and gold, favour fools.

Weiber hüten ist vergebliche Arbeit. Watching women is labour in
vain.

Weiber-Schönheit, das Echo im Wald; und Regenbogen vergehen
bald. Woman’s beauty, the forest echo, and rainbows, soon pass away.

Weiber sind unrichtige Uhren. Women are watches that keep bad
time.

Weiber sind veränderlich wie Aprilwetter. Women are as fickle as
April weather.

Weiberrache hat keine Grenzen. A woman’s vengeance knows no
bounds.

Wein auf Bier rath ich dir, Bier auf Wein das laß sein. Wine
upon beer is very good cheer; beer upon wine consider with fear.

Wein und Weiber machen alle Welt zu Narren. Wine and women make
fools of everybody.

Weise sein ist nicht allzeit gut. It is not always good to be
wise.

Weiser Mann, starker Mann. A wise man, a strong man.

Weinende Braut, lachende Frau. The weeping bride makes a
laughing wife.

Weit vom Streite macht alte Kriegsleute. Away from the battle
all are soldiers. (Of war all can tattle, away from the battle.)

Wem das Glück pfeifet, der tanzet wohl. He dances well to whom
fortune pipes.

Wem das Glück wohl will, dem will niemand übel. Whom fortune
favours, the world favours.

Wem es allezeit zu früh dünkt, der kommt gewiß zu spät. He who
always thinks it is too soon, is sure to come too late.

Wem Gott ein Amt giebt, dem giebt er auch Verstand. Where God
bestows an office, he provides brains to fill it.

Wem’s juckt, der kratze sich. Let him that itches, scratch
himself.

Wem man giebt, der schreibt’s in den Sand; wem man nimmt, der
schreibt’s in Stahl und Eisen. What you _give_, is written in sand;
what you _take_, with an iron hand.

Wem nicht zu rathen ist, dem ist auch nicht zu helfen. He who
won’t be advised, can’t be helped.

Wem wohl ist, der schweige. Let him who is well off hold his
tongue.

Wen Viele fürchten, der muß Viele fürchten. He who is feared by
many, fears many.

Wenig und oft macht zuletzt viel. Little and often makes a heap
in time.

Wenig unternehmen giebt viel Frieden. Small undertakings give
great comfort.

Weniger Rath und viele Hände. Less advice and more hands.

Wenn alte Gäul’ in Gang kommen, sind sie kaum zu halten. When
old horses get warm, they are not easily held in.

Wenn das Glück anpocht, soll man ihm aufthun. When fortune
knocks, open the door.

Wenn das Schiff gut geht, will jeder Schiffherr sein. In a calm
sea, every man is a pilot.

Wenn das Wort heraus ist, gehört’s einem Andern. When the word
is out, it belongs to another.

Wenn der Diener reich wird und der Herr arm, so taugen sie beide
nichts. If the servant grows rich and the master poor, they are
both good for nothing.

Wenn der Fuchs Gänse fangen will, wedelt er mit dem Schwanze.
When the fox wants to catch geese, he wags his tail.

Wenn der Fuchs predigt, so nimm die Gänse in Acht. When the fox
preaches, look to the geese.

Wenn der Fürst einen Apfel will, so nehmen seine Diener den ganzen
Baum. If the prince wants an apple, his servants take the tree.

Wenn der Gast am liebsten ist, soll er wandern. When the guest
is in most favour, he will do well to quit.

Wenn der Hund wacht, mag der Hirte schlafen. When the dog is
awake, the shepherd may sleep.

Wenn der Sack voll ist, reckt er die Ohren. When the sack is
full, it pricks up its ears.

Wenn der Scherz am besten ist, soll man aufhören. When the jest
is at its best, ’twill be well to let it rest.

Wenn die Armuth zur Thür eingeht, so fliegt die Liebe zum Fenster
hinaus. When poverty comes in at the door, love flies out at the
window.

Wenn die Birne reif ist, fällt sie ab. When the pear is ripe, it
falls.

Wenn die Herren vom Rathhause kommen, so sind sie klüger, als da sie
hinaufgingen. When the lords come out of the council-house, they
are wiser than when they went in.

Wenn die Hirten sich zanken, hat der Wolf gewonnen Spiel. When
shepherds quarrel, the wolf has a winning game.

Wenn die Katze außer dem Hause ist, tanzen die Mäuse. When the
cat’s away the mice will play.

Wenn die Kuh den Schwanz verloren hat, merkt sie es erst, wozu er
gut gewesen ist. It is not till the cow has lost her tail, that she
discovers its value.

Wenn die Narren kein Brot äßen, wäre das Korn wohlfeil. If fools
were to eat no bread, corn would be cheap.

Wenn die Noth am größten, ist die Hilf’ am nächsten. When need
is greatest, help is nearest.

Wenn ein Bettler auf’s Pferd kömmt, so kann ihm kein Teufel mehr
voreilen. Set a beggar on horseback, and he’ll outride the devil.

Wenn ein Blinder den andern führt, fallen sie beide in den
Graben. When blind leads blind, both fall into the ditch.

Wenn eine Hölle ist, so steht Rom darauf. If there be a hell,
Rome is built over it.

Wenn Gott ein Land strafen will, nimmt er den Herren die
Weisheit. When God means to punish a nation, he deprives the rulers
of wisdom.

Wenn Gott sagt: Heute, sagt der Teufel: Morgen. When God says
To-day, the devil says To-morrow.

Wenn man dem Volk die Ziegel doppelt, so kommt Moses. When the
tale of bricks is doubled, then comes Moses.

Wenn man den Wolf nennt, so kömmt er gerennt. Talk of the devil,
and his imp appears.

Wenn man reich ist, fängt man an zu sparen. When a man is rich,
he begins to save.

Wenn mancher Mann wüßt’, wer mancher Mann wär, dann mancher Mann
manchem man, erzeigte mehr Ehr’. If some men knew who some men
were, then some would pay the more honour there.

Wenn’s Kalb gestohlen ist, bessert der Bauer den Stall. When the
calf is stolen, the peasant mends the stall.

Wenn’s Maaß voll ist, läuft es über. When the measure is full,
it runs over.

Wer A sagt, muß auch B sagen. He that says A, must also say B.

Wer Allen dient, macht sich Keinem verbindlich. Who makes
friends of all, keeps none.

Wer allerlei Holz auflieset, hat bald einen Arm voll. He that
picks up all sorts of wood, soon gets an armful.

Wer Alles haben will, bekommt am Ende nichts. He who grasps at
all, holds nothing fast.

Wer allzeit säuft, und allzeit schlemmt, behält zuletzt kein ganzes
Hemd. He who is always drinking and stuffing, will in time become a
ragamuffin.

Wer am Boden liegt, über den läuft Jedermann. He who lies on the
ground must expect to be trodden on.

Wer an dem Wege bauet, der hat viele Meister. He who builds by
the road-side has many masters.

Wer Andere anschwärzt, ist darum nicht weiß. Who blackens
others, does not whiten himself.

Wer Andere jagt, muß selber laufen. He that hunts others, must
run himself.

Wer Andern eine Grube gräbt, fällt selbst hinein. He who digs a
pit for others falls into it himself.

Wer Arbeit liebt und sparsam zehrt, der sich in aller Welt
ernährt. Who loves his work and knows to spare, may live and
flourish anywhere.

Wer auf halbem Wege umkehrt, irrt nur zur Hälfte. He who stops
half way is only half in error.

Wer aus Liebe heirathet, hat gute Nächte und üble Tage. He that
marries for love has good nights, but sorry days.

Wer austheilen will, muß auch einnehmen. He who gives, must take
(meaning a joke).

Wer bald gibt, der doppelt gibt. He who gives quickly, gives
doubly.

Wer beim Wolf Gevatter stehen will, muß einen Hund unter seinem
Mantel haben. He who stands godfather to a wolf should have a dog
under his cloak.

Wer bringt, ist willkommen. He who brings, is welcome.

Wer da bauet an der Straßen, muß die Leute reden lassen. He who
builds on the public way, must let the people have their say.

Wer da fällt, über den läuft alle Welt. When a man is down,
everybody runs over him.

Wer das Kleine achtet, ist des Großen würdig. He who prizes
little things, is worthy of great ones.

Wer dem Haufen folgt, hat viele Gesellen. He who follows the
crowd has many companions.

Wer dem Kinde die Nase wischt, küßt der Mutter den Backen. He
who wipes the child’s nose, means to kiss the mother’s cheek.

Wer dem Pöbel dient, hat ’nen schlechten Herrn. He who serves
the people has a bad master.

Wer dem Spiele zusieht, kann’s am besten. He who looks on knows
more of the game than he who plays.

Wer den Acker pflegt, den pflegt der Acker. Take care of your
plough, and your plough will take care of you.

Wer den Armen giebt, leihet dem Herrn. He who gives to the poor,
lends to the Lord.

Wer den Armen leihet, dem zahlet Gott die Zinsen. He who lends
to the poor, gets his interest from God.

Wer den Credit verloren hat, der ist todt für die Welt. He that
has lost his credit is dead to the world.

Wer den einen Fuß im Hurenhaus hat, hat den andern im Spital. He
who has one foot in a brothel, has the other in a hospital.

Wer den Kern essen will, muß die Nuß knacken. He that wants the
kernel must crack the nut.

Wer den Nagel am Hufeisen nicht achtet, verliert auch das Pferd.
He who heeds not the lost shoe-nail, will soon lose the horse.

Wer den Pabst zum Vetter hat, kann bald Kardinal werden. He who
has the Pope for his cousin may soon be a Cardinal.

Wer den Schalk hinter sich läßt, der hat eine gute Tagreise
gethan. He who has left a rogue behind him, has made a good day’s
journey.

Wer den Sieg behält, der hat Recht. He who has victory, has
right.

Wer den Teufel einmal in’s Haus geladen, kann sein’ nimmermehr
abkommen. He who has once invited the devil into his house, will
never be rid of him.

Wer der Bösen schont, schadet den Frommen. He who spares vice,
wrongs virtue.

Wer die Augen nicht aufthut, muß den Beutel aufthun. He who does
not open his eyes must open his purse.

Wer die Kunst nicht übt, verlernt sie bald. Practise not your
art, and ’twill soon depart.

Wer die Leiter hält, ist so schuldig wie der Dieb. He who holds
the ladder is as bad as the thief.

Wer die Leiter hinauf will, muß bei der untersten Sproße
anfangen. He who would climb the ladder must begin at the bottom.

Wer die Tochter will gewinnen, mit der Mutter soll beginnen. He
who would the daughter win, with the mother must begin.

Wer drei Feinde hat, muß sich mit zweien vertragen. He who has
three enemies must agree with two.

Wer droht, der warnt. Who threatens, warns.

Wer Ehre verdient, bekommt sie nicht; und wer sie hat, verdient sie
nicht. They who deserve honour, fail of it; and they who obtain it,
do not deserve it.

Wer Eier haben will, muß sich das Gackern gefallen lassen. He
who will have eggs, must bear with the cackling.

Wer Eier unter den Füßen hat, muß leis’ auftreten. He who treads
on eggs, must tread lightly.

Wer ein gläsern’ Dach hat, muß andere nicht mit Steinen werfen.
He who has a glass roof must not throw stones at others.

Wer ein Haus kauft, hat manchen Balken und Nagel umsonst. He who
buys a house gets many a plank and nail for nothing.

Wer ein Kalb stiehlt, stiehlt eine Kuh. Who steals a calf,
steals a cow.

Wer einen Aal beim Schwanz und Weiber faßt bei Worten, wie feste der
auch hält, hält nichts an beiden Orten. Who takes an eel by the
tail or a woman by her word, grasp as he will, holds nothing fast.

Wer einen Bauer betrügen will, muß einen Bauer mitbringen. He
who would cheat a peasant, must take one with him.

Wer einen Betrüger betrügt und einen Dieb bestiehlt, erlangt für
100 Jahre Ablaß. He who cheats a cheat and robs a thief, earns a
dispensation for 100 years.

Wer einen Heller erbt, muß einen Thaler bezahlen. He who
inherits a farthing, is expected to disburse a dollar.

Wer einen Kopf hat, bekommt leicht einen Hut. Who has a head
won’t want for a hat.

Wer einen lobt in Præsentia und schimpft in Absentia, den hole
die Pestilentia. He who praises in _præsentia_, and abuses in
_absentia_, have with him _pestilentia_.

Wer einen Stein über sich wirft, dem fällt er leicht auf den
Kopf. Who throws a stone above himself may have it fall on his own
head. (Ecclus. xxvii. 25.)

Wer einmal stiehlt, der bleibt ein Dieb. Once a thief, always a
thief.

Wer ekel ist, entbehrt manchen guten Bissen. Who is over nice,
loses many a slice.

Wer empfing, der rede; wer gab, der schweige. Who receives,
should thank; who gives, should be silent.

Wer Feuer bedarf, suche es in der Asche. If you want fire, look
for it in the ashes.

Wer findet ehe verloren wird, der stirbt ehe er krank wird. He
who finds what has not been lost, will chance to die before he is ill.

Wer fürchtet, er thue zu viel, der thut immer zu wenig. He who
is afraid of doing too much, always does too little.

Wer geringe Dinge wenig acht’t, sich um geringere Mühe macht.
Who heeds not little things, will be troubled about lesser ones.

Wer gern borgt, bezahlet nicht gern. He who is quick at
borrowing, is slow in paying.

Wer gern borgt, lügt gern. Who readily borrows, readily lies.
(Debtors are liars.)

Wer gern freien will, muß nicht lange wählen. He who fain would
marry, in choice should not tarry.

Wer gewinnen will, lerne vertragen. Who would win, must learn to
bear.

Wer gewinnt, spielt am besten. He plays best, who wins.

Wer gut bezahlt, kann wieder borgen. He who pays well may borrow
again.

Wer gute Beine hat, hat oft schlechte Stiefeln. He that has good
legs, has often bad boots.

Wer gute Nachbarn hat, bekommt ’nen guten Morgen. He who has
good neighbours, gets a good morning.

Wer hängen soll, ersäuft nicht. He that is born to be hanged
will never be drowned.

Wer hat, der behalt’; Liebe wird alt, Unglück kommt bald. Who
has, let him thereof take heed; love wanes, misfortune comes with speed.

Wer heirathet, thut wohl, wer ledig bleibt, thut besser. He who
marries does well, but who remains single does better.

Wer hoch klimmt, der fällt hart. He that climbs high, falls
heavily.

Wer im Alter will jung seyn, der muß in der Jugend alt seyn. Who
would be young in age, must in youth be sage.

Wer im dreißigsten Jahre nichts weiß, im vierzigsten nichts ist, im
fünfzigsten nichts hat; der lernt nichts, wird nichts, und kömmt zu
nichts. Who _knows_ nothing in his thirtieth year, _is_ nothing in
his fortieth, _has_ nothing in his fiftieth; _learns_ nothing, _is_
nothing, and _comes to_ nothing.

Wer im Frühjahr nicht säet, wird im Spätjahr nicht erndten. They
must hunger in frost who spring-time have lost.

Wer im Grabe liegt, dem ist wohl gebettet. He who lies in the
grave, is well lodged.

Wer im Kleinen spart, kann im Großen freigebig sein. He who
saves in little things, can be liberal in great ones.

Wer im Singen zu hoch anfängt, kommt nicht aus. He who pitches
too high, won’t get through his song.

Wer in den Röhren sitzt, der schneidet sich Pfeiffen wie er
will. He that sits among reeds, cuts pipes when he pleases.

Wer in’s Feuer bläst, dem fliegen die Funken in die Augen. He
who blows in the fire will get sparks in his eyes.

Wer in einen sauern Apfel gebissen hat, dem schmeckt der süße desto
besser. Who has tasted a sour apple, will have the more relish for
a sweet one.

Wer in Frieden will walten, muß leiden und still halten. He who
would prosper in peace, must suffer in silence.

Wer Jedermann den Mund stopfen wollte, bedürfte viel Mehl. He
that would stop everybody’s mouth needs plenty of flour.

Wer kauft, was er nicht braucht, wird bald verkaufen, was er
braucht. He who buys what he don’t want, will soon sell what he
does want.

Wer keinen Kopf hat, braucht keinen Hut. He that has no head,
needs no hat.

Wer kleine Sünden meidet, fällt nicht in große. Who avoids small
sins, does not fall into great ones.

Wer kleinen Herren dienet, der ist selbst Herr mit. He who
serves small masters, is himself one of them.

Wer lange wählet und mäkelt, kauft endlich gar nichts, oder
schlechte Waare. Long choosing and cheapening ends in buying
nothing, or bad wares.

Wer langsam reitet, soll früher satteln. Who rides slow, must
saddle betimes.

Wer leicht glaubt, wird leicht betrogen. Who are ready to
believe, are easy to deceive.

Wer Lieb’ erzwingt, wo keine ist, der bleibt ein Thor zu aller
Frist. He who forces love where none is found, remains a fool the
whole year round.

Wer meint, daß er weise sei, dem wohnt ein Esel nahe bei. He who
conceits himself wise, has an ass near at hand.

Wer mich einmal betrügt, dem verzeihe es Gott; betrügt er mich
wieder, verzeihe mir’s Gott. Who deceives me once, shame on him; if
he deceives me twice, shame on me.

Wer mit den Wölfen ist, muß mit den Wölfen heulen. Who herds
with wolves, must howl with wolves.

Wer mit der Hoffnung fährt, hat die Armuth zum Kutscher. He who
travels with hope, has poverty for his coachman.

Wer mit Füchsen zu thun hat, muß den Hühnerstall zuhalten. He
who has to do with foxes must look after his hen-roost.

Wer mit Hunden zu Bette geht, steht mit Flöhen wieder auf. He
who goes to bed with dogs, will wake up with fleas.

Wer mit jungen Ochsen pflügt, macht krumme Furchen. He who
ploughs with young oxen, makes crooked furrows.

Wer nach jedem bellenden Hunden werfen will, muß viel Steine
auflesen. He that pelts every barking dog, must pick up a great
many stones.

Wer neidet, der leidet. He who envies, suffers.

Wer nicht Bitteres gekostet hat, weiß nicht was süß ist. He who
has not tasted bitter, knows not what sweet is.

Wer nicht empfängt, braucht nicht wieder zu geben. Who accepts
nothing, has nothing to return.

Wer nicht ernähren will die Katzen, muß ernähren Mäuse und
Ratzen. Who will not feed the cats, must feed the mice and rats.

Wer nicht gut helfen kann, kann sehr gut hinderlich seyn. He who
cannot help, may hinder.

Wer nicht hören will, muß fühlen. He that won’t listen, must
feel.

Wer nicht in den Himmel will, braucht keine Predigt. He that
will not be saved needs no preacher.

Wer nicht kann fechten, gewinnt nichts im Rechten. Who cannot
fight, wins nought by right.

Wer nicht kann mit dem Beutel, muß mit der Haut bezahlen. He who
cannot pay with his purse, must pay with his hide.

Wer nicht liebt Wein, Weib und Gesang, der bleibt ein Narr sein
Lebenlang. Who loves not women, wine, and song, remains a fool his
whole life long.

Wer nicht malen kann, muß Farbe reiben. He who cannot paint must
grind the colours.

Wer nicht mit mir ist, der ist wider mich. He who is not for me,
is against me.

Wer nicht singen kann, mag pfeifen. Who cannot sing, may whistle.

Wer nicht vorwärts kommt, bleibt zurück. He who does not go
forward, stays behind.

Wer nichts an die Angel steckt, fängt nichts. He who does not
bait his hook catches nothing.

Wer nichts aus sich macht, ist nichts. He who makes himself
nothing, is nothing.

Wer nichts lieber übt als Tadel, hat im Herzen keinen Adel. Who
lends his lips to nought but blame, has in his heart no love of fame.

Wer nichts verspricht, braucht nichts zu halten. Who makes no
promises, has none to perform.

Wer oft schießt, trifft endlich. He who shoots often, hits at
last.

Wer Ohren hat zu hören, der höre. He who hath ears to hear, let
him hear.

Wer Pech angreift, besudelt sich. He who handles pitch, besmears
himself.

Wer Recht fordert, muß auch Recht pflegen. Who demands justice,
must administer justice.

Wer Recht nicht will leiden, darf über Gewalt nicht klagen. Who
refuses to submit to justice, must not complain of oppression.

Wer redet was er will, muß hören was er nicht will. He who says
what he likes, must hear what he does not like.

Wer regieren will, der muß hören und nicht hören, sehen und nicht
sehen. He who would rule, must hear and be deaf, see and be blind.

Wer reich werden will, muß seine Seele eine Zeit lang hinter die
Kiste werfen. Who would be rich, must keep his soul under cover of
his cash-box.

Wer sagt, daß Wucher Sünde sey, der hat kein Geld, das glaube
treu. That usury is a sin some hold, but take for granted they’ve
no gold.

Wer schläft allein, der bleibt lang kalt; zwei wärmen sich einander
bald. He who sleeps alone keeps long cold, two soon warm each other.

Wer schlechte Botschaft bringt, kommt früh genug. He who brings
bad tidings, comes soon enough.

Wer schweigt, bejaht. Silence gives consent.

Wer sein eigener Lehrmeister sein will, hat einen Narren zum
Schüler. He who is his own teacher, has a fool for his pupil.

Wer seine Schulden bezahlt, verbessert seine Umstände. He who
pays his debts, betters his condition.

Wer seinen Zorn bezwingt, hat einen Feind besiegt. The greatest
conqueror is he who conquers himself.

Wer sich alle Büsche besieht, kommt selten zu Holze. He that
peeps into every bush will hardly get into the wood.

Wer sich auf der Achsel sitzen läßt, dem sitzt man nachher auf dem
Kopfe. Who lets another sit on his shoulder, will soon have him on
his head.

Wer sich das Maul verbrennt hat, bläst die Suppe. He who has
once burnt his mouth, always blows his soup.

Wer sich helfen lassen will, dem ist gut zu helfen. It is easy
to help him, who is willing to be helped.

Wer sich heute nicht bessert, wird morgen ärger. He who does not
improve to-day will grow worse to-morrow.

Wer sich mausig macht, den fressen die Katzen. He who makes a
mouse of himself, will be eaten by the cats. (This is a pun; sich
mausig machen means to swagger or assume undue importance.)

Wer sich selber kitzelt, lacht wenn er will. He who tickles
himself, laughs when he likes.

Wer sich selber lobt, muß üble Nachbaren haben. He who praises
himself must have bad neighbours.

Wer sich selbst nichts taugt, taugt keinem Andern. He who is of
no use to himself, is of no use to any one else.

Wer sich zu Honig macht, den benaschen die Fliegen. He who makes
himself honey, will be eaten by the flies.

Wer sich zum Esel macht, dem will jeder seinen Sack auflegen.
Make yourself an ass, and every one will lay his sack on you.

Wer sich zum Schafe macht, den fressen die Wölfe. Make yourself
a sheep, and the wolves will eat you.

Wer ungebeten kommt, geht ungedankt davon. Who comes unbidden
departs unthanked.

Wer Unglück soll haben, der stolpert im Grase, fällt auf den Rücken
und bricht seine Nase. He who is born to misfortune stumbles as he
goes, and though he fall on his back will fracture his nose.

Wer verachtet, der will kaufen. He that finds fault, wants to
buy.

Wer viel anfängt, endet wenig. He who begins much, finishes
little.

Wer viel schwatzt, lügt viel. He who prates much, lies much.

Wer vom Altare lebt, soll auch dem Altare dienen. He who lives
by the church should serve the church.

Wer von Hoffnung lebt, der stirbt am Fasten. He who lives on
hope, dies of hunger.

Wer was will gelten, der komme selten. Who would wish to be
valued must make himself scarce.

Wer weiter will als sein Pferd kann, der sitze ab und gehe zu
Fuß. He who would go further than his horse, must alight and go on
foot.

Wer wenig spricht, hat wenig zu antworten. Who says little, has
little to answer for.

Wer will wissen, wer er sei, erzürne seiner zwei oder drei. If a
man would know what he is, let him anger his neighbours.

Wer wohl sitzt, der rücke nicht. Who is well seated should not
budge.

Wer zu Hof sein will, muß bald oben bald unten liegen. He who
would succeed at court, must lie sometimes low, sometimes high.

Wer zu viel faßt, läßt viel fallen. He who grasps too much lets
much fall.

Wer zuerst kommt, mahlt zuerst. Who comes first, grinds first.

Wer zuletzt lacht, lacht am besten. He who laughs last, laughs
best.

Wer zur Gewalt schweigt, verliert sein Recht. Who bows to might
loses his right.

Wer zwei Hasen zugleich hetzt, fängt gar keinen. Who hunts two
hares together catches neither.

Wer zwischen zwei Freunden Richter ist, verliert den einen. He
who is judge between two friends, loses one of them.

Wer’s Alter nicht ehrt, ist des Alter’s nicht werth. Who honours
not age, is unworthy of it.

Wer’s Glück hat, führt die Braut heim. He who has the fortune
brings home the bride.

Wer’s Kleine nicht acht’t, dem wird’s Große nicht gebracht. He
who takes no care of little things, will not have the care of great
ones.

Wer’s links anfängt, dem geht’s links. Who begins amiss, ends
amiss.

Wer’s Uebel nicht straft, ladet es ins Haus. Who does not punish
evil, invites it.

Wer’s Ungewisse will nach Hause führen, kann’s Gewisse vom Wagen
verlieren. Who carries doubtful people to his house, will doubtless
from his carriage something lose.

Werkleute findet man leichter denn Meister. Workmen are easier
found than masters. (There are more hands than heads.)

Weß’ Brot ich esse, deß’ Lied ich singe. Whose bread I eat, his
song I sing.

Wessen Huldin schielt, der sagt: sie liebäugele. He whose
mistress squints, says she ogles.

Wider den Strom ist schwer schwimmen. ’Tis hard to swim against
the stream.

Wie das Maul, also der Salat. Like lips, like lettuce.

Wie der Acker, so die Rüben; wie der Vater, so die Büben. As the
field, so the crops; as the father, so the sons.

Wie der Baum, so die Birne; wie die Frau, so die Dirne. As the
tree, so the fruit; as the mistress, so the maid.

Wie der Baum, so die Frucht. As the tree, so the fruit.

Wie der Herr, so der Knecht. Like master, like man.

Wie der Meister, so das Werk. As the master, so the work.

Wie die Alten singen, so zwitschern die Jüngen. As the old birds
sing, the young ones twitter.

Wie die Arbeit, so der Lohn. As the labour, so the pay. (No
pains, no gains.)

Wie die Frau, so die Magd. As the mistress, so the maid.
(Hackney mistress, Hackney maid.)

Wie Du mir, so ich Dir. Claw me, and I’ll claw thee.

Wie ein Ding nutzet, ist es geputzet. As a thing is used, so it
brightens.

Wie einer isset, so arbeitet er. As a man eats, so he works.
(Quick at meat, quick at work.)

Wie gesät, so geschnitten. As you sow, you shall reap.

Wie gewonnen, so zerronnen. As won, so spent. (Lightly come,
lightly go.)

Wie leicht kommt nicht ein Haar in die Butter! How easily a hair
gets into the butter!

Wie man sich bettet, so schläft man. As you make your bed, so
you must lie on it.

Wie mancher liest in der Bibel, und lebt doch sehr übel. How
many daily read the Word, and yet from vice are not deterred. (How many
daily read the Bible, and yet pursue their course of evil.)

Wie sich einer schick’ also hat er Glück. As fortune is sought,
so it is found. (Good luck, with good looking after! _or_, As you make
your bed, so you must lie on it.)

Williges Pferd soll man nicht treiben. Spur not a willing horse.

Willst Du ’nen Juden betrügen, mußt Du ein Jude seyn. He that
would cheat a Jew, must be a Jew.

Willst Du lange leben gesund? Iß, wie die Katze; trink wie der
Hund! Would you live long, be healthy and fat, drink like a dog and
eat like a eat.

Willst du stark sein, so überwinde dich selbst. Would you be
strong, conquer yourself.

Windmühlen kann man nicht mit Blasbälgen treiben. Windmills are
not driven by bellows.

Wir können nicht Alle Pabst zu Rom werben. We cannot all be Pope
of Rome.

Wir wollen ihn bitten, wie man dem Esel thut; wenn er die Säck’
nicht will tragen, so schlägt man ihn genug. Entreat him in jackass
fashion; if he won’t carry the sack, give him a whack.

Wissen ist leichter als thun. To know is easier than to do.

Würf’ er einen Groschen auf’s Dach, fiel’ ihm ein Thaler
herunter. Were he to throw a groat on the roof, it would come down
a dollar.

Wo der beste Wein wächst, trinkt man den schlechtesten. Where
the best wine grows, the worst is drunk.

Wo der Fuchs sein Lager hat, da raubt er nicht. The fox does not
prey near his hole.

Wo der liebe Gott eine Kirche baut, da baut der Teufel eine
Kapelle. Where God builds a church, the devil builds a chapel.

Wo der Teufel nicht hin mag, da schickt er ein alt’ Weib. Where
the devil can’t go himself, he sends an old woman.

Wo der Zaun am niedrigsten ist, da springt der Teufel hinüber.
Where the hedge is lowest, the devil leaps over.

Wo der Zaun am niedrigsten ist, steigt man über zu aller Frist.
Where the hedge is lowest, men leap over.

Wo die Frau im Hause regiert, ist der Teufel Hausknecht. Where a
woman rules the house, the devil is serving-man.

Wo die Löwenhaut nicht reicht, muß man den Fuchsbalg annähen.
Where the lion’s skin falls short, borrow of the fox.

Wo die Wurzel nichts taugt, ist auch der Stamm nichts werth.
When the root is worthless, so is the tree.

Wo ein schöner Fleck ist, da schmeißt der Teufel ein Kloster hin
oder einen Edelmann. Wherever there is a pretty spot, the devil
plants a monastery or a lord.

Wo es schlimm hergeht in der Welt, da ist ein Pfaffe dabei und ein
Weib. Wherever there is mischief, there is sure to be a priest and
a woman in it.

Wo Freunde, da Reichthum. Where friends, there riches.

Wo Geld ist, da ist der Teufel; wo keines ist, da ist er
zweimal. Where there’s money, there is the devil; but where there’s
none, a greater evil.

Wo Geld redet, da gilt alle Rede nicht. Where gold chinks,
arguments are of no avail. (Where gold avails, argument fails.)

Wo Geld und Gut, da ist kein Muth. With houses and gold, men are
rarely bold.

Wo Gewalt Herr ist, da ist Gerechtigkeit Knecht. Where might is
master, justice is servant.

Wo Gewalt recht hat, da hat Recht keine Gewalt. Where might is
right, right is not might.

Wo Jedermann geht, da wächst kein Gras. Where every one goes,
the grass never grows.

Wo kein Eifersucht, da ist keine Liebe. Where there’s no
jealousy, there’s no love.

Wo keine Scham ist, ist auch keine Ehre. Where there’s no shame,
there’s no honour.

Wo Liebe mangelt, erspähet man alle Fehler. Where there’s no
love, all faults are seen.

Wo man den Esel krönt, ist Stadt und Land gehöhnt. Where’er an
ass is crown’d to fame, both town and country bear the shame.

Wo nichts ist, da hat der Kaiser sein Recht verloren. Where
there is nothing, the Emperor loses his right.

Wo Rauch ist, muß auch Feuer sein. No smoke without fire.

Wo Scham ist, ist Tugend. Where there is shame, there is virtue.

Wo sich zweie zanken, gewinnt der Dritte. Where two fall out,
the third wins.

Wo Wasser gewesen ist, da kommt Wasser wieder. Where water has
been, water will come again.

Wo weder Glauben an Himmel noch Hölle, da zieht der Teufel alle
Gefälle. Who neither believes heaven or hell, the devil heartily
wishes him well.

Wo Wein eingeht, geht Scham aus. Where wine goes in, modesty
goes out.

Wo zu viel Arbeiter sind, da richtet man wenig aus. Where there
are too many workmen, there is little work. (Too many cooks spoil the
broth.)

Wo’s spukt, da liebt oder diebt sich’s. Were ghosts walk, there
is loving or thieving.

Wohl angefangen, ist halb gethan. Well begun, is half done.

Wohlfeil kostet viel Geld. Bargains are costly.

Wohlgethan überlebt den Tod. Well-done outlives death.

Wohlgeschmack bringt Bettelsack. A dainty stomach beggars the
purse. (Much taste, much waste.)

Worte füllen den Sack nicht. Words don’t fill the sack.

Worte sind gut, aber Hühner legen Eier. Words are good, but
fowls lay eggs.

Worte sind gut, wenn Werke folgen. Words are good, when works
follow.

Worte thun oft mehr als Schläge. Words often do more than blows.

Worte vom Schnee der vor’m Jahre fiel. Words of snow, which fell
last year.


Z.

Zage haben kein Glück. Cowards have no luck.

Zahltag kommt alle Tag. Pay-day comes every day.

Zanken und Disputiren thut die Wahrheit verlieren. Between
wrangling and disputing truth is lost.

Zartem Ohre halbes Wort. To a quick ear half a word.

Zaum und Sattel mit dem Pferde zu Schinder führen. Take a horse
to the knacker, and throw in bridle and saddle.

Zehren und Gasten, leert Küche, Keller und Kasten. Spending your
money with many a guest, empties the kitchen, the cellar and chest.

Zeig mir ’nen Lügner, ich zeig dir ’nen Dieb. Show me a liar,
and I’ll show you a thief.

Zeit bringt alles, wer warten kann. Time brings everything, to
those who can wait for it.

Zeit bringt Rosen. Time brings roses.

Zeit, Ebbe und Fluth, warten auf Niemand. Time and tide wait for
no man.

Zeit gebiert Wahrheit. Time is the herald of truth.

Zeit ist der beste Rathgeber. Time is the best counsellor.

Zeit ist des Zornes Arznei. Time is anger’s medicine.

Zeit macht Heu. Time makes hay.

Zeit und Gelegenheit hat Niemand im Aermel. Time and opportunity
are in no man’s sleeve.

Zeit und Stunde rennt durch den rauhsten Tag. Time and the hour
run through the roughest day.

Zeit verdeckt und entdeckt alles. Time covers and discovers
everything.

Zeit verräth und hängt den Dieb. Time betrays and hangs the
thief.

Zeit, Wind, Frauen und Glück, verändern sich all’ Augenblick.
Time, wind, women, and fortune, are ever changing.

Zielen ist nicht genug, es gilt Treffen. It is not enough to
aim, you must hit.

Zins und Miethe schlafen nicht. Rent and taxes never sleep.

Zorn ohne Macht wird verlacht. Anger without power is folly.
(Anger can’t stand, without a strong hand.)

Zorn thut nicht mit Rath. Anger hears no counsel.

Zornes Ausgang, der Reue Anfang. The end of wrath is the
beginning of repentance.

Zu geschehenem Ding soll man das Beste reden. When a thing is
done, make the best of it. (Make the best of a bad bargain.)

Zu Gottes Hülfe gehört Arbeit. God helps them that help
themselves.

Zu Hof giebt man viel Händ’, aber wenig Herzen. At court there
are many hands, but few hearts.

Zu Nacht sind alle Katzen grau. At night all cats are grey.

Zu Sanct-Nimmerstag. When two Sundays come together.

Zu spät ist es, am Ende zu sparen. ’Tis too late to spare when
the pocket is bare.

Zum Fasse sehen, wenn der Wein im Keller fließt. When the wine
runs to waste in the cellar, he mends the cask.

Zum Lernen ist Niemand zu alt. No one is too old to learn.

Zum Reiten gehört mehr denn ein Paar Stiefeln. More belongs to
riding than a pair of boots.

Zusagen macht Schuld. Promises make debts.

Zu vie Demuth ist Hochmuth. Too much humility is pride.

Zu viel muß bald brechen. Too much will soon break.

Zu viel Weisheit ist Narrheit. Too much wisdom is folly.

Zwei Augen, zwei Ohren, nur ein Mund. Two eyes, two ears, only
one mouth.

Zwei harte Steine mahlen nicht reine. Two hard flints never
grind well.

Zwei Hunde an einem Bein, kommen selten überein. Two dogs over
one bone seldom agree.

Zwei Katzen und Eine Maus, zwei Weiber in Einem Haus, zwei Hund’
an einem Bein, kommen selten überein. Two cats and one mouse, two
women in one house, two dogs to one bone, will not agree long.

”Zwinge mich, so thu’ ich kein Sünde,” sprach das Mädchen.
“Force me, and I shall commit no sin,” said the girl.

Zwischen Amboß und Hammer. Between the hammer and the anvil.

Zwischen eines Weibes “Ja” und “Nein” läßt sich keine Nadelspitze
stecken. Between a woman’s “Yes” and “No” there is no room for the
point of a needle.

Zwischen Nachbars Garten ist ein Zaun gut. Between neighbours’
gardens a hedge is not amiss.




SPANISH PROVERBS.


A.

Abad avariento por un bodigo pierde ciento. _A coveteous abbot for one
offering loses a hundred._

Abad de Carçuela, comistes la olla, pedis la caçuela. _Abbot of
Carçuela, you eat up the pot and ask for the pipkin._

Abajanse los adarves y alzanse los muladares. _Walls sink and dunghills
rise._

A barba de necio aprenden todos á rapar. _On a fool’s beard all learn
to shave._

Abiendo escalera por do bajar, buscais soga para os colgar. _With a
staircase before you, you look for a rope to go down by._

Abrenuncio Satanas, mala capa llevarás. _Renounce the devil, and thou
shalt wear a shabby cloak._

A buen compañon buena compañia. _For a good companion good company._

A buey haron poco le presta el aguijon. _A lazy ox is little the letter
for the goad._

A buey viejo no le cates abrigo. _No need to seek shelter for an old
ox._

A cabo de cien años todos seremos calvos. _A hundred years hence we
shall all be bald._

A cada malo su dia malo. _To every evil doer his evil day._

A cada necio agrada su porrada. _Every fool is pleased with his bauble._

A calças cortas abugeta largas. _Short hose must have long points._

A carne de lobo, diente de perro. _To wolf’s flesh dog’s tooth._

A casa de tu hermano no irás cada serano. _Go not every evening to your
brother’s house._

A casa de tu tia, mas no cada dia. _Go to your aunt’s house, but not
every day._

A cavallo comedor cabedro corto. _A short halter for a greedy horse._

A cavallo dado no le miren el diente. _Look not a gift horse in the
mouth._

A celada de bellacos, mejor es el hombre por los pies que por los
manos. _At an ambuscade of villains a man does better with his feet
than his hands._

Achaques al viernes por no le ayunar. _Friday pretexts for not fasting
(meaning pleas of indisposition for not eating fish)._

A chico pajarillo, chico nidillo. _Little bird, little nest._

A clérigo hecho de fraile, no le fies tu comadre. _Trust not your
gossip to a priest who has been a friar._

A cuentas viejas, barajas nuevas. _Old reckonings make new disputes._

Acuestate sin cena, y amanecerás sin deuda. _Go to bed supperless and
you will wake without debt._

A Dios rogando y con el mazo dando. _Praying to God and hitting with
the hammer._

A Dios te doy, libreta, bevida, y por hilar. _God take you, pound (of
flax), drunk out and not yet spun._

A dos pardales en una espiga nunca hay liga. _Two sparrows on one ear
of corn never agree._

Adó pensas que hay tocinos, no hay estacas. _Where you think there is
bacon, there are not even hooks for it._

Adó sacan y non pon, presto llegan al hondon. _Always taking out and
never putting in, soon reaches the bottom._

Adonde vas, mal? Adonde mas hay. _Whither goest thou, misfortune? To
where there is more._

Adonde yrá el buey, que no are? _Whither shall the ox go where he will
not have to plough?_

Adó vas, duelo? Adó suelo. _Whither goest thou, sorrow? Whither I am
used to go._

A fuer de Aragon, buen servicio, mal galardon. _According to the custom
of Aragon, good service, bad guerdon._

Agora que tengo oveja y borrego, todos me dizen: En hora buena estais,
Pedro. _Now that I have an ewe and a lamb, every one says to me: Good
morrow, Peter._

A gran salto, gran quebranto. _A great leap gives a great shake._

Agua passada no muele molino. _Water past will not turn the mill._

A hija casada salen nos yernos. _When our daughter is married
sons-in-law are plenty._

Ahorrar para la vejez, ganar un maravedi y bever tres. _To save for old
age, earning a maravedi and drinking three._

A idos de mi casa, y que quereis con mi muger? no hay que responder.
_There is no answer for Get out of my house, and What have you to do
with my wife?_

Alábate, cesto, que venderte quiero. _Praise yourself, basket, for I
want to sell you._

A la boda de Don Garcia lleva pan en la capilla. _Carry bread in your
hood to Don Garcia’s wedding._

A la burla, dejarla quando mas agrada. _Leave the jest at its best._

A la cabeça, la comida la endereça. _Eating sets the head to rights._

Al agradecido, mas de lo pedido. _To the grateful man give more than he
asks._

A la longa el galgo á la liebre mata. _In the long run the greyhound
kills the hare._

A la luna el lobo al asno espulga. _The wolf picks the ass’s fleas by
moonlight._

A la muger y á la picaza, lo que dirias en la plaza. _To a woman and a
magpie tell your secrets in the marketplace._

A la primera azadonada quiere sacar agua. _He expects to find water at
the first stroke of the spade._

A las barbas con dineros honra hacen los caballeros. _To beards with
money cavaliers pay respect._

A las burlas así ve á ellas que no se salgan de veras. _Jest so that it
may not turn to earnest._

Al asno muerto, la cebada al rabo. _The ass dead, the barley at his
tail._

A las malas lenguas, tixera. _For evil tongues, scissors._

A las veces do cazar pensamos, cazados quedamos. _When we think to
catch we are sometimes caught._

A las veces lleva el hombre á su casa con que llore. _A man may hap to
bring home with him what makes him weep._

A la vulpeja dormida, no le cae nada en la boca. _Nothing falls into
the mouth of a sleeping fox._

Al buen pagador, no le duelen prendas. _A good paymaster needs no
security._

Alcança, quien no cansa. _He who does not tire, achieves._

Al desdichado poco le vale ser esforzado. _It little avails the
unfortunate to be brave._

Alegrias, antruejo, que mañana serás ceniza. _Be merry, Shrovetide, for
to-morrow thou wilt be ashes._

Al enemigo, si vuelve la espalda, la puente de plata. _Make a bridge of
silver for the flying enemy._

Al enhornar se tuerce el pan. _It is in putting it into the oven that
the loaf is made crooked._

Al envidioso afilásele el gesto y crécele el ojo. _The envious man’s
face grows sharp and his eyes big._

Al fin se canta la Gloria. _At the end the Gloria is chanted._

Al gato por ser ladron, no le eches de tu mansion. _Don’t send away
your cat for being a thief._

Algo va de Pedro á Pedro. _There is some distance between Peter and
Peter._

Algun dia mande tanto Pedro como su amo. _Some day Peter will command
as much as his master._

Al gusto dañado lo dulce le es amargo. _To a depraved taste sweet is
bitter._

Al hacer temblar, y al comer sudar. _To shiver at work, and sweat at
meals._

Al hijo de tu vezina quítale el mico, y cásale con tu hija. _Wipe the
nose of your neighbour’s son, and marry him to your daughter._

Al hombre bueno, no le busques abolengo. _Ask not after a good man’s
pedigree._

Al hombre osado, la fortuna le da la mano. _To the bold man fortune
gives her hand._

Al hombre venturero, la hija le nace primero. _The lucky man has a
daughter for his first-born._

Allá va la lengua, do duele la muela. _The tongue goes where the tooth
aches._

Allá van leyes, do quieren reyes. _Laws go the way kings direct._

Al lavar saldrá la mancilla. _The spot will come out in the washing._

Allá vayas, mal, adó te pongan buen cabeçal. _Away with thee, sickness,
to where they make a good pillow for thee._

Allegador de la ceniza y deramador de la harina. _He gathers up ashes
and scatters flour._

Allégate á los buenos, y serás uno dellos. _Associate with the good,
and you will be one of them._

Al llamado de quien le piensa viene el buey á la melena. _The ox comes
to the yoke at the call of his feeder._

Al loco y al toro, darles corro. _Make way for a madman and a bull._

Al mas ruin puerco la mejor bellota. _The worst pig gets the best
acorn._

Al médico, confesor, y letrado, no le hayas engañado. _Deceive not thy
physician, confessor, or lawyer._

Al mozo mal mandado, ponle la mesa, y embiale al recado. _If you have a
loitering servant, set his dinner before him and send him on an errand._

A lo que puedes solo, no esperes á otro. _Expect not at another’s hand
what you can do by your own._

A los bobos se les aperece la Madre de Dios. _The Mother of God appears
to fools._

A los osados, ayuda la fortuna. _Fortune aids the bold._

Al perro flaco, todo es pulgas. _The lean dog is all fleas._

Al puerco gordo, untarle el rabo. _To grease the fat pig’s tail._

Al que cueze y amasa no le hurtar hogaça. _Do not steal a loaf from him
that kneads and bakes._

Al que dá el capon, dale la pierna y el alon. _To him who gives you a
capon you may spare a leg and a wing._

Al que mal hace, nunca le falta achaque. _The wrong doer is never
without a pretext._

Al que tiene muger hermosa, ó castillo en frontera, ó viña en carrera,
nunca le falta guerra. _He who has a handsome wife, a castle on the
frontier, or a vineyard on the roadside, is never without war._

Al que yerra, perdónale una vez, mas no despues. _Him who errs, forgive
once, but never twice._

Alquimia provada, tener renta y no gastar nada. _It is approved alchemy
to have an income and spend nothing._

Al raton que no tiene mas que un agujero, presto le cogen. _The rat
that has but one hole is soon caught._

Al toro y al aire, darles calle. _Don’t stop the way of a bull or of a
current of air._

Al villano dadle el pie, y tomarse ha la mano. _Give a clown your foot,
and he’ll take your hand._

Al yerno y al cochino, una vez el camino. _To a son-in-law and a hog
you need show the way but once._

Ama á quien no te ama, responde á quien no te llama, correrás carrera
vana. _Love one that does not love you, answer one that does not call
you, and you will run a fruitless race._

A maa veziña da agulla sin liña. _The bad neighbour gives a needle
without thread._ (Galician.)

A madrina, que eso yo me lo sabia. _Hush, brideswoman, I knew all that
before._

A mal ñudo mal cuño. _To a hard knot a hard wedge._

A maravedi de pleyto, real de papel. _A lawsuit for a maravedi consumes
a real’s worth of paper._

A Mari Ardida nunca le falta mal dia, á Mari Monton Dios se lo da, y
Dios se le pon. _Mary Busybody never wants a bad day, and Hilary Drone
has God to give and bring to her._

Amar y saber, no puede ser. _To love and be wise is impossible._

Ama, soys ama mientras el niño mama, y despues no nada. _Nurse, you are
mistress whilst the child sucks, and after that nothing._

A mengua de carne, buenos son pollos con tocino. _When you can’t get
meat, chickens and bacon are good._

A mengua de pan, buenas son tortas. _When you can’t get bread,
oat-cakes are not amiss._

Amigo del buen tiempo mudará con el viento. _A fair-weather friend
changes with the wind._

Amigo de pleitos, poco dinero; amigo de médicos, poca salud; amigo de
frailes, poca honra. _Fond of lawsuits, little wealth; fond of doctors,
little health; fond of friars, little honour._

Amigo do todos y de ninguno todo es uno. _Everybody’s friend and
nobody’s friend is all one._

Amigo quebrado, soldado, mas nunca sano. _Friendship broken may be
soldered, but never made whole._

Amigo reconciliado, enemigo doblado. _A reconciled friend is a double
enemy._

Amigos y mulas fallescen á as duras. _Friends and mules fail in hard
trials._ (Galician.)

Amistad de yerno, sol de invierno. _A son-in-law’s friendship is a
winter’s sun._

Amor de niño, agua en cesto. _A boy’s love is water in a sieve._

Amor de padre, que todo lo otro es aire. _A father’s love, for all
other is air._

Amores nuevos olvidan viejos. _New loves drive out the old._

Amores, dolores y dineros no pueden estar secretos. _Love, grief, and
money cannot be kept secret._

Amor fa molt, argent fa tot. _Love does much, money does all._
(Catalan.)

Amor loco, yo por vos, y vos por otro. _Mad love—I for you, and you
for another._

A moro muerto gran lanzada. _A great lance-thrust to a dead Moor._

A mucho hablar, mucho errar. _Much talking, much erring._

A muertos y á idos no hay mas amigos. _The dead and the absent have no
friends._

A muger mala poco le aprovecha guarda. _There is little use in watching
a bad woman._

A mula vieja cabezadas nuevas. _New trappings to an old mule._

Andando gana la hazeña, que no estándose queda. _The mill gains by
going, and not by standing still._

Andando y hablando, marido, á la horca. _Talk as you go, husband, to
the gallows._

Andar á caza con huron muerto. _To go rabbit catching with a dead
ferret._

Andeme yo caliente, y riase la gente. _Let me go warm, and folks may
laugh._

Animo vence en guerra, que no arma buena. _It is courage that
vanquishes in war, and not good weapons._

Ante la puerta del rezador, nunca eches tu trigo al sol. _Never spread
your corn to dry before the door of a saintly man._

Antes de casar, ten casas en que morar, y tierras en que labrar, y
viñas en que podar. _Before you marry, have a house to live in, fields
to till, and vines to cut._

Antes de la hora gran denuedo; venidos al punto, venidos al miedo.
_Before the time great courage; when at the point, great fear._

Antes de mil años todos seremos calvos. _In less than a thousand years
we shall all be bald._

Antes di que digan. _Say before they say._ (_Tell your own story
first._)

Antes moral que almendro. _Rather mulberry than almond._ (_The
almond-tree is in blossom earlier than the mulberry._)

Antes que cases, mira que haces, que no es ñudo que deshaces. _Before
you marry, beware, for it is a knot difficult to untie._

Antes toman al mentiroso que al cojo. _The liar is sooner caught than
the cripple._

A olla que hierve, ninguna mosca se atreve. _No flies light on a
boiling pot._

A otro perro con ese hueso. _Throw that bone to another dog._

A padre guardador, hijo gastador. _After a thrifty father, a prodigal
son._

A palabras locas orejas sordas. _To mad words deaf ears._

A pan duro diente agudo. _A sharp tooth for hard bread._

A pobreza no hay vergüenza. _Poverty is no sin._

A poca barba, poca vergüenza. _Little beard, little modesty._

Aprendiz de Portugal, no sabe cozer y quiere cortar. _A Portuguese
apprentice who can’t sew, yet would be cutting out._

A presurosa demanda espaciosa respuesta. _To a hasty demand a leisure
reply._

A puerta cerrada, el diablo se vuelve. _When the devil finds the door
shut, he goes away._

A puerta de cazador nunca gran muladar. _There is never a great
dunghill at a sportsman’s door._

A puñadas entran las buenas hadas. _Good luck makes its way in by
elbowing._

Aquel es tu amigo que te quita de ruido. _He is your friend who gets
you out of a fray._

Aquella ave es mala, que en su nido caga. _It is an ill bird that fouls
its own nest._

Aquella es bien casada, que no tiene suegra ni cuñada. _She is well
married who has neither mother-in-law nor sister-in-law._

Aquellos son ricos que tienen amigos. _They are rich who have friends._

Aquel pierde venta que no tiene que venda. _He loses his market who has
nothing to sell._

A quien dan, no escoge. _Beggars must not be choosers._

A quien dices tu puridad, á ese das tu libertad. _You surrender your
freedom where you deposit your secret._

A quien Dios quiere bien, la perra le pare lechones. _Whom God loves,
his bitch litters pigs._

A quien hace casa, ó se casa, la bolsa le quede rasa. _He who builds a
house, or marries, is left with a lank purse._

A quien madruga, Dios le ayuda. _God helps the early riser._

A quien miedo le han, lo suyo le dan. _He who is feared gets more than
his own._

A quien no le basta espada y corazon, no le bastarán corazas y lanzon.
_For whom sword and courage are not enough, corslet and lance will not
be enough._

A quien no le sobra pan, no crie can. _Who has no bread to spare should
not keep a dog._

A quien no mata puerco, no le dan morcilla. _They who don’t kill pigs
must not expect black-puddings._

A quien no tiene nada, nada le espanta. _Who has nothing, fears
nothing._

A quien tiene buena muger, ningun mal le puede venir, que no sea de
sufrir. _He who has a good wife can bear any evil._

A quien tiene mala muger, ningun bien le puede venir, que bien se puede
decir. _He who has a bad wife can expect no happiness that can be so
called._

A quien vela, todo se le revela. _To him that watches, everything is
revealed._

Ara bien y hondo, cogerás pan en abondo. _Plough deep and you will have
plenty of corn._

Ara por enjuto ó por mojado, no besarás á tu vecino en el rabo. _Plough
wet or dry, and you will not have to kiss your neighbour’s breech._

Arco siempre armado, ó flojo ó quebrado. _The bow that is always bent
slackens or breaks._

Arde verde por seco, y pagan justos por pecadores. _The green burns for
the dry, and the righteous pay for sinners._

Ares, no ares, renta me pagues. _Plough or not plough, you must pay
your rent._

A rio revuelto, ganancia de pescadores. _It is good fishing in troubled
waters._

Armas y dineros buenas manos quieren. _Arms and money require good
hands._

Arremángose mi nuera, y trastornó en el fuego la caldera. _My
daughter-in-law tucked up her sleeves, and upset the kettle into the
fire._

Arrieros somos, y en el camino nos encontraremos. _We are both
carriers, and shall meet on the road._

A salvo está el que repica. _He is in safety who rings the tocsin._

Así acontescen cosas récias, como ir á la plaza y venir sin orejas.
_Such awkward things will happen as going into the great square and
coming back without ears._

Así dijó la zorra á las uvas, no pudiendolas alcazar, que no estarvan
maduras. _The grapes are sour, said the fox when he could not reach
them._

Así está el pages entre dos advocats como el pagel entre dos gats. _A
peasant between two lawyers is like a fish between two cats._ (Catalan.)

Así me decis que en el monte hay lobos, y en el valle raposos. _So you
tell me there are wolves on the mountain, and foxes in the valley._

Asna con pollino no va derecha al molino. _An ass with her colt goes
not straight to the mill._

Asno con oro alcánzalo todo. _The golden ass passes everywhere._

Asno de muchos, lobos le comen. _The ass of many owners is food for
wolves._

Asno sea quien á asno vocea. _An ass let him be who brays at an ass._

Assaz puede poco, quien no amenaza á otro. _He can do but little who
cannot threaten another._

A su amigo el gato siempre le deja señalado. _The cat always leaves her
mark upon her friend._

A tí lo digo, hijuela; entiéndelo tú, mi nuera. _I say it to you,
daughter; hear it, daughter-in-law._

A todo hay maña, sino á la muerte. _There is a remedy for everything
but death._

A tu amigo dile la mentira; si te guardare poridad, dile la verdad.
_Tell your friend a lie; and if he keeps it secret, tell him the truth._

A tu amigo gánale un juego, y bévele luego. _Win a game of your friend,
and drink the money on the spot._

A tu criado no le hartes de pan, no pedirá queso. _Do not stuff your
servant with bread, and he won’t ask for cheese._

A tuerto ó á derecho, ayude Dios á nuestro concejo. _Right or wrong,
God aid our purpose._

A tuerto ó á derecho, nuestra casa hasta al techo. _Right or wrong,
’tis our house up to the roof._

A tu hijo, buen nombre y oficio. _To your son give a good name and a
trade._

Aun no asamos, é ya empringamos. _We are not yet roasting, and already
we make sops in the pan._

Aun no ensillamos, é ya cavalgamos. _We have not yet saddled, and are
already mounted._

Aunque el decidor sea loco, el escuchador sea cuerdo. _Though the
speaker be a fool, let the hearer be wise._

Aunque la mona se vista de seda, mona so queda. _A monkey remains a
monkey, though dressed in silk._

Aunque manso tu sabueso, no le muerdas en el bezo. _Though your
bloodhound be gentle, don’t bite him on the lip._

Aunque me veis con este capote, otro tengo en el monte. _Though you see
me with this coat, I have another up the mountain._

Aunque mi suegro sea bueno, no quiero perro con concerro. _Though my
father-in-law is a good man, I do not like a dog with a bell._

Aunque seas prudente viejo, no desdeñes el consejo. _Though you are a
prudent old man, do not despise counsel._

A un traidor dos alevosos. _Two false men to one traitor._

Ausencia enemiga de amor; quan lejos de ojo, tan lejos de corazon.
_Absence is a foe to love; away from the eyes, away from the heart._

A vaca que no come con os bois, ó come ante, ó come despois. _The cow
that does not eat with the oxen, either eats before or after them._
(Galician.)

Ave con cuchar nunca entre en tu corral. _Let no shovel-beaked bird
ever enter your yard._

Ave muda no hace agüero. _A mute bird makes no omen._

A volpe va por o millo e non come, mas dalle con o rabo e sacode. _The
fox goes through the corn and does not eat, but brushes it down with
his tail._ (Galician.)

Aya cebo en el palomar, que palomas ellas se vernán. _Let there be food
in the pigeon-house, and the pigeons will come to it._

Ayer vaquero, hoy caballero. _Yesterday a cowherd, to-day a cavalier._

Ay te duele, ay te daré. _Where you smart there I will hit you._

Ay ten a gallena os ollos do ten os ovos. _The hen’s eyes are where her
eggs are._ (Galician.)

Ayudándose tres, para peso de seis. _Three who help each other are as
good as six._

Azotan á la gata, si no hila nuestra ama. _They whip the cat, if our
mistress does not spin._

Azotenme en la plaza, que no lo sepan en mi casa. _Let them whip me in
the market-place, provided it be not known at home._


B.

Barba bien remojada, medio rapada. _A beard well lathered is half
shaved._

Barriga caliente, pie dormiente. _The paunch warm, the foot sleepy._

Barro y cal encubran mucho mal. _Clay and lime conceal much evil._

Bel hombre no es todo pobre. _A handsome man is not quite poor._

Bendita aquella casa que no tiene corona rapada. _Happy the home in
which there is no shaven crown._

Bien ama quien nunca olvida. _He loves well who never forgets._

Bien cuenta la madre, mejor cuenta el infante. _The mother reckons
well, but the child reckons better._

Bien merca á quien no dicen hombre bestia. _He buys well who is not
called a donkey._

Bien ó mal, casado me han. _For letter for worse they have married me._

Bien perdido y conocido. _A good thing lost is a good thing valued._

Bien predica quien bien vive. _He preaches well who lives well._

Bien sabe el asno en cuya cara rebuzna. _The ass knows well in whose
face he brays._

Bien sabe el huego cuya capa quema. _The fire well knows whose cloak
burns._

Bien sabe el sabio que no sabe, el nescio piensa que sabe. _The wise
knows that he does not know; the ignoramus thinks he knows._

Bien sabe la vulpeja con quien trebeja. _The fox knows well with whom
he plays tricks._

Bien sé lo que digo quando pan pido. _I know well what I say when I ask
for bread._

Bien vengas, mal, si vienes solo. _Welcome, misfortune, if you come
alone._

Bocado comido no gana amigo. _A morsel eaten selfishly does not gain a
friend._

Boca que dice de sí, dice de no. _The mouth that says yes says no._

Bofeton amagado, nunca bien dado. _A buffeting threatened is never well
given._

Buen abogado, mal vecino. _A good lawyer, a bad neighbour._

Buena es la gallina que otro cria. _Good is the fowl which another
rears._

Buena fama hurto encubre. _A good name covers theft._

Buen amigo es el gato, sino que rascuña. _The cat is friendly, but
scratches._

Buenas palabras y ruines hechos engañan sabios y locos. _Good words and
bad deeds deceive both wise and simple._

Buena vida arrugas tira. _A good life defers wrinkles._

Buen corazon quebranta mala ventura. _A good heart breaks bad fortune._

Buen jubon me tengo en Francia. _I have a good jacket in France._

Bueno, bueno, bueno, mas guarde Dios mi burra de su centeno. _Good,
good, good, but God keep my ass out of his rye._

Buen principio, la mitad es hecho. _Well begun is half done._

Buen siglo haya quien dijó bolta. _Blessings on him that said, Face
about._

Buey viejo, sulco derecho. _An old ox makes a straight furrow._

Burla burlando vase el lobo al asno. _All in the way of joke the wolf
goes to the ass._

Burlaos con el asno, daros ha en la cara con el rabo. _Play with an ass
and he will flirt his tail in your face._

Burlaos con el loco en casa, burlará con vos en la plaza. _Play with
the fool at home, and he will play with you abroad._

Burlas de manos, burlas de villanos. _Manual jokes are clowns’ jokes._

Buscais pan de trastrigo. _You want better bread than wheaten._

Buscar cinque pies al gato. _To look for five feet in a cat._


C.

Cabra coja no quiere siesta. _A lame goat will not sleep by day._

Cacarrear, y no poner huevo. _To cackle and lay no egg._

Cada buhonero alaba sus agujas. _Every pedlar praises his own needles._

Cada cabello hace su sombra. _Every hair casts its shadow._

Cada carnero de su pie cuelga. _Let every sheep hang by its own foot._
(_Every man should support himself, and not hang upon another._)

Cada cosa en su tiempo, y nabos en Adviento. _Everything in its season,
and turnips in Advent._

Cada cuba huele al vino que tiene. _Every cask smells of the wine it
contains._

Cada gallo canta en su muladar. _Every cock crows on his own dunghill._

Cada ollero su olla alaba, y mas si la trae quebrada. _Every potter
praises his pot, especially if cracked._

Cada qual siente el frio como anda vestido. _Every one feels the cold
according as he is clad._

Cada uno cuenta de la feria como le va en ella. _Every one speaks of
the fair as he himself finds it._

Cada uno en su casa, y Dios en la de todos. _Every one in his own
house, and God in all men’s._

Cada uno es hijo de sus obras. _Every man is the son of his own works._

Cada uno estiende la pierna como tiene la cubierta. _Every one
stretches his legs according to the length of his coverlet._ (_Cut your
coat according to your cloth._)

Cada uno estornuda como Dios le ayuda. _Every one sneezes as God
pleases._

Cada uno por sí, y Dios por todos. _Every one for himself, and God for
us all._

Cada uno quiere llevar el agua á su molino, y dejar en seco el del
vecino. _Every one wishes to bring water to his own mill, and leave his
neighbour’s dry._

Cada uno sabe donde le aprieta el zapato. _Every one knows where his
shoe pinches him._

Cae en la cueva el que otro á ella lleva. _He falls into the pit who
leads another into it._

Caldo de tripas, bien te repicas. _Tripe broth, you make much of
yourself._

Caldo de zorra que está frio y quema. _Fox’s broth, cold and scalding._

Callar y ojos, tomaremos la madre y los pollos. _Silence and look out,
we shall catch both hen and chicks._

Campana cascada, nunca sana. _A cracked bell will never be sound._

Can que madre tiene en villa, nunca buena ladrilla. _The dog that has
its bitch in town never barks well._

Cantarillo que muchas veces va á la fuente, ó deja el asa ó la frente.
_The pitcher that goes often to the well leaves either its handle or
its spout._

Cantar mal y porfiar. _To sing out of tune and persist in it._

Capon de ocho meses para mesa de rey. _A capon eight months old is fit
for a king’s table._

Cara de beato, y uñas de gato. _A devotee’s face, and a cat’s claws._

Caro cuesta el arrepentir. _Repentance costs dear._

Casa el hijo quando quisieres, y la hija quando pudieres. _Marry your
son when you will, and your daughter when you can._

Casa hospidada, comida y denostada. _A house filled with guests is
eaten up and ill spoken of._

Casa labrada y viña plantada. _A house ready built and a vineyard ready
planted._

Casarás y amansarás. _Marry and grow tame._

Casarme quiero, comeré cabeza de olla, y sentarme he primero. _I’ll
marry, and eat the prime of the pot, and sit down first._

Castiga al que no es bueno, y aborrecerte ha luego. _Chastise one that
is worthless, and he will presently hate you._

Castillo apercebido no es decebido. _A fortress on its guard is not
surprised._

Cayósele el pan en la miel. _His bread fell into the honey._

Cien sastres, cien molineros, y cien texederos son trecientos ladrones.
_A hundred tailors, a hundred millers, and a hundred weavers, are three
hundred thieves._

Cierra tu puerta, y harás tu vecina buena. _Shut your door, and you
will make your neighbour a good woman._

Cobra buena fama, y échate á dormir. _Get a good name, and go to sleep._

Cobre gana cobre, que no huesos de hombre. _Copper begets copper, and
not (the labour of) men’s bones._ (_So money gets money._)

Coces de yegua, amores para el rocin. _The mare’s kicks are caresses to
the horse._

Combida á tu yerno á la gallina, que él llevará la lima. _Invite your
son-in-law to a fowl, and he will take away the lemon._

Comer y rascar, todo es empezar. _To eat and to scratch one has but to
begin._

Como canta el abad, responde el sacristan. _As the abbot sings the
sacristan responds._

Como costal de carbonero, malo de fuera, peor de dentro. _Like a
collier’s sack, bad without and worse within._

Compuesta no hay muger fea. _No woman is ugly when she is dressed._

Con agena mano sacar la culebra del horado. _To draw the snake out of
the hole with another’s hand._

Con agua pasada no muele molino. _The mill does not grind with water
that has passed._

Con dineros no te conocerás, sin dineros no te conocerán. _With money
you would not know yourself, without money nobody would know you._

Con el Rey y con la Inquisicion, chitos! _About the King and the
Inquisition, hush!_

Con hijo de gato no se burlan los ratones. _Rats do not play tricks
with kittens._

Con lo que Sancho cura, Marta cae mala. _What cures Sancho makes Martha
sick._

Con mal está la casa donde la rueca manda al espada. _It fares ill with
the house where the spinning-wheel commands the sword._

Con todo el mondo guerra, y paz con Inglaterra. _War with all the
world, and peace with England._

Con una cautela otra se quiebra. _One trick is met by another._

Con un poco de tuerto llega el hombre á su derecho. _With a little
wrong a man comes by his right._

Coraçon determinado no sufre ser aconsejado. _A determined heart will
not be counselled._

Cornudo sois, marido: muger, y quien te lo dijo? _Husband, you are a
cuckold: wife, who told you so?_

Cortesía de boca mucho vale y poco cuesta. _Lip courtesy avails much
and costs little._

Cosa mala nunca muere. _A bad thing never dies._

Cosa que no se venda, nadie la siembra. _Nobody sows a thing that will
not sell._

Costumbre buena, costumbre mala, el villano quiere que vala. _Be a
custom good or bad, a peasant will have it continue in force._

Costumbre hace ley. _Custom becomes law._

Crea el cuervo, y sacarte ha los ojos. _Foster a raven and it will peck
out your eyes._

Criatura de un año saca la leche del calcano. _A child of a year old
sucks milk from the heel._

Cuidado ageno de pelo cuelga. _Another’s care hangs by a hair._

Cuidados agenos matan el asno. _Other folks’ cares kill the ass._

Cuñados, y perros bermejos pocos buenos. _Of brothers-in-law and red
dogs few are good._


D.

Da Dios alas á la hormiga para que se pierda mas aina. _God gives wings
to the ant that she may perish the sooner._

Da Dios almendras á quien no tiene muelas. _God gives almonds to one
who has no teeth._

Dadiva de ruin á su dueño parece. _A bad man’s gift is like his master._

Dadivas quebrantan peñas. _Gifts break (or dissolve) rocks._

Dame donde me asiente, que yo me haré donde me acueste. _Give me a
seat, and I will make myself room to lie down._

Dar en el clavo. _To hit the nail on the head._

De amigo reconciliado, guarte de él como del diablo. _Beware of a
reconciled friend as of the devil._

De aquellos polvos vienen estos lodos. _From that dust comes this mud._

Debajo del buen sayo está el hombre malo. _Under a good cloak may be a
bad man._

Debajo de mi manto al rey mato. _Under my cloak I kill the king._

Debajo de una mala capa hay un buen bebedor. _Under a bad cloak there
is a good tippler._

De casa del gato no vá harto el rato. _The mouse does not leave the
cat’s house with a bellyful._

De cosário á cosário no se llevan sino los barriles. _Corsair against
corsair nothing is got but empty casks._

De cuero ageno correas largas. _Large thongs of another man’s leather._

De diestro á diestro el mas presto. _Between two sharpers, the
sharpest._

De dineros y bondad, siempre quita la mitad. _In the report, of riches
and goodness always bate one half._

Dedo de espada, palma de lanza, es gran ventaja. _An inch in a sword,
or a palm in a lance, is a great advantage._

De do sacan y no pon, presto llegan al hondon. _Taking out and not
putting in soon reaches the bottom._

De gran subida gran caida. _The higher the rise the greater the fall._

De haré, haré, nunca me pagué; mas vale un toma que dos te daré. _I
never was satisfied with “I will, I will.” One “take this” is better
than two “I will give you.”_

De herrero á herrero no pasa dinero. _Between Smith and Smith no money
passes._

De hombre que no habla, y de can que no ladra, libera nos. _From a
silent man, and a dog that does not bark, deliver us._

Del agua mansa me libre Dios, que de la recia me guardaré yo. _From
smooth water God preserve me, from rough I will preserve myself._

Del alcalde al verdugo, ved como subo. _See how he has risen from a
mayor to a hangman._

De la mala muger te guarda, y de la buena no fies nada. _Beware of a
bad woman, and put no trust in a good one._

De la mano á la boca se pierde la sopa. _Between the hand and the mouth
the soup is lost._

De la nieve, ni cocida, ni majada, no sacarás sino agua. _From snow,
whether baked or boiled, you will get nothing but water._

Del dicho al hecho hay gran trecho. _Between saying and doing there is
a long road._

Del mal el menor. _Of evils, the least._

Del mal que hombre teme, de ese muere. _Of the malady a man fears, he
dies._

De lo contado come el lobo. _The wolf eats of what is counted._

De los leales se hinchen los hospitales. _The poor-houses are filled
with the honestest people._

De luengas vias luengas mentiras. _From long journeys long lies._

Del pan de mi compadre buen zatico á mi ahijado. _From my gossip’s
bread a large piece for my godson._

De me digan, y á mi pidan. _Let them talk of me, and beg of me._

De mozo rezador, y de viejo ayunador, guarde Dios mi capa. _From a
praying young man, and a fasting old man, God preserve my cloak._

De noche los gatos todos son pardos. _At night all cats are grey._

De padre santo, hijo diablo. _The father a saint, the son a sinner._

De pequeña centella, gran hoguera. _A little spark kindles a great
fire._

De persona callada arriedra tu morada. _From a silent person remove
your dwelling._

De piel agena larga la correa. _Of other men’s leather large thongs._

De potro sarnoso buen caballo hermoso. _A scabby colt may make a good
horse._

De puerta cerrada el diablo se torna. _The devil turns away from a
closed door._

De quien pone los ojos en el suelo no fies tu dinero. _Trust not your
money to one whose eyes are bent on the ground._

De rabo de puerco nunca buen virote. _A pig’s tail will never make a
good arrow._

Derecho apurado, tuerto tornado. _Right overstrained turns to wrong._

De ruin á ruin, quien acomete vence. _Coward against coward, the
assailant conquers._

De ruin paño nunca buen sayo. _There’s no making a good cloak of bad
cloth._

Desaprovechado como unto de mona. _As useless as monkey’s fat._

Descalabrar al alguacil, y acogerse al corregidor. _To break the
constable’s head, and take refuge with the sheriff._

Desde que te erré, nunca bien te quisé. _Since I wronged you, I have
never liked you._

Deshacer cruzes en un pajar. _To undo crosses in a straw loft_ (i.e.
_to part all the straws that they may not lie crosswise; to be over
nice_).

Despues de descalabrado untarle el casco. _After breaking my head you
bring plaister._

Despues del daño cada uno es sabio. _Every one is wise when the
mischief is done._

Despues de vendimias, cestos. _After the vintage, baskets._

Despues que la casa está hecha, la deja. _After the house is finished,
he deserts it._

Despues que me estas castigando, ciento y veinte agujeros conté en
aquel rallo. Since you have been scolding me, _I have counted a hundred
and twenty holes in that nutmeg grater._

Desque nací lloré, y cada dia nace porqué. _When I was born I wept, and
every day brings a reason why._

Desquitóse Miguel; perdió un ducado y ganó un conejo. _Michael is
quits; he lost a ducat and gained a rabbit._

De traidor harás leal con bien hablar. _Give a traitor good words and
you make him loyal._

Detras de la cruz está el diablo. _The devil lurks behind the cross._

De tu muger y de tu amigo esperto, no creas sino lo que supieres
cierto. _Of your wife and your tried friend believe nothing but what
you know for certain._

Deudas tienes, y haces mas; si no mentiste, mentiras. _You have debts,
and make debts still; if you’ve not lied, lie you will._

De un hombre necio á vezes buen consejo. _A fool sometimes gives good
counsel._

De un solo golpe no se derrueca un roble. _An oak is not felled at one
stroke._

Deve algo para Pascua, y hacérsete ha corta la cuaresma. _Have a bill
to pay at Easter, and your Lent will be short._

Di á tu amigo tu secreto, y tenerte ha el pie en el pescuezo. _Tell
your friend your secret, and he will set his foot on your neck._

Dicen los niños en el solejar lo que oyen á sus padres en el hogar.
_What children hear their parents say by the fireside they repeat in
the highway._

Dijó la sarten á la caldera, Tirte allá, cul negra. _Said the frying
pan to the kettle, Stand off, black bottom._

Dile que es hermosa, y tornarse ha loca. _Tell her she is handsome, and
you will turn her head._

Dime con quien andas, diréte quien eres. _Tell me what company you
keep, and I will tell you who you are._

Di mentira, y sacarás verdad. _Tell a lie, and you will bring out the
truth._

Dinero llama dinero. _Money gets money._

Dineros de avaro dos veces van al mercado. _Misers’ money goes twice to
market._

Dios es el que sana, y el médico lleva la plata. _God cures, and the
doctor takes the fee._ (_God healeth, and the physician hath the
thanks._)

Dios me dé contienda con quien me entienda. _God grant me to argue with
those who understand me._

Dios me libre de hombre de un libro. _God deliver me from a man of one
book._

Dios os libre de hidalgo de dia, y de fraile de noche. _God deliver us
from a gentleman by day and a friar by night._

Dios proveerá, mas buen haz de paja se querrá. _God will provide, but a
good bundle of straw will not be amiss._

Dios te dé fortuna, hijo, que el saber poco te vale. _God grant you
fortune, my son, for knowledge avails you little._

Dísela tú una vez, que el diablo se la dirá diez. _Tell it her once,
and the devil will tell it her ten times._

Do entra beber, sale saber. _When drink enters, wisdom departs._

Do falta dicha, por demas es diligencia. _Where luck is wanting,
diligence is useless._

Do fueres, harás como vieres. _Wherever you are, do as you see done._
(_When you are at Rome, do as Rome does._)

Do fuerza viene, derecho se pierde. _Where force prevails, right
perishes._

Donde fuiste paje, no seas escudero. _Be not an esquire where you were
a page._

Donde hay gana, hay maña. _Where there’s a will there’s a way._

Donde huego se hace, humo sale. _Where there’s fire there’s smoke._

Donde irá el buey que no are? _Where shall the ox go and not plough?_

Donde menos se piensa salta la liebre. _The hare starts from where she
is least expected._

Donde os comieron la carne, que roan los huesos. _Where they eat your
meat let them pick the bones._

Donde perdiste la capa, ay la cata. _Where you lost your cloak, seek
it._

Donde una puerta se cierra, otra se abre. _Where one door is shut
another opens._

Dormireis sobre ello, y tomareis acuerdo. _Sleep over it, and you will
come to a resolution._

Dos amigos de una bolsa, el uno canta, el otro llora. _When there are
two friends to one purse, one sings, the other weeps._

Dos aves de rapiña no mantienen compaña. _Two birds of prey do not keep
each other company._

Do tu padre fué con tinta, no vayas tu con quilma. _Where your father
has been with ink, go not you with a bag_ (i. e. _what your father has
sold and assigned, think not to recover with a bag of papers. In other
words, don’t go to law for it_).

Do va mas hondo el rio, hace menos ruido. _Where the river is deepest
it makes least noise._

Duerme á quien duele, y no duerme quien algo deve. _A sick man sleeps,
but not a debtor._


E.

Echar el mango tras el destral. _To throw the helve after the hatchet._

Echar la pluma al aire, y ver donde cae. _To throw up a feather in the
air, and see where it falls._

Echar un virote tras otro. _To send one arrow after another._

Echate á enfermar, verás quien te quiere bien, y quien te quiere mal.
_Fall sick, and you will see who is your friend and who not._

El abad de Bamba, lo que no puede comer, dalo por su alma. _What the
abbot of Bamba cannot eat he gives away for the good of his soul._

El agujero llama al ladron. _The hole invites the thief._

El amenazador hace perder el lugar de venganza. _The threatener loses
the opportunity of vengeance._

El amor verdadero no sufre cosa encubierta. _True love suffers no
concealment._

El amor y la fe en las obras se vee. _Love and faith are seen in works._

El bien suena y el mal vuela. _Good news is rumoured and bad news
flies._

El bobo, si es callado, por sesudo es reputado. _A fool, if he holds
his tongue, passes for wise._

El buen hombre goza el hurto. _The honest man enjoys the theft._

El buen pagador señor es de lo ageno. _A good paymaster is keeper of
others’ purses._

El buen vino la venta trae consigo. _Good wine sells itself._

El buey bravo en tierra agena se hace manso. _The fierce ox becomes
tame on strange ground._

El buey quando se cansa, firme sienta la pata. _The tired ox plants his
foot firmly._

El buey que me acornó, en buen lugar me echó. _The ox that butted me
tossed me into a good place._

El buey sin cencerro piérdese presto. _The ox without a bell is soon
lost._

El campo fertil no descansando, torna se esteril. _The fertile field
becomes sterile without rest._

El can de buena raza, si hoy no caza, mañana caza. _The well-bred
hound, if he does not hunt to-day will hunt to-morrow._

El caracol, por quitar de enojos, por los cuernos trocó los ojos. _The
snail, to be rid of annoyances, bartered its eyes for horns._

El carnero encantado que fué por lana, y volvió trasquilado. _The
deceived sheep that went for wool and came back shorn._

El cebo es el que engaña, que no el pescador ni la caña. _It is the
bait that lures, not the fisherman or the rod._

El conejo ido, el consejo venido. _When the rabbit has escaped, comes
advice._

El corazon no es traidor. _The heart is no traitor._

El corcobado no vee su corcoba, y vee la de su compañon. _The hunchback
does not see his own hump, but sees his companion’s._

El cordero manso mama á su madre, y á qualquiera; el bravo ni á la
suya, ni á la agena. _The gentle lamb sucks any ewe as well as its
mother; the surly lamb sucks neither its own nor another._

El cuerdo no ata el saber á estaca. _The wise man does not hang his
knowledge on a hook._

El dar es honor, y el pedir dolor. _To give is honour, to lose is
grief._

El dar limosna nunca mengua la bolsa. _Giving alms never lessens the
purse._

El deseo hace hermoso lo feo. _Desire beautifies what is ugly._

El dia de ayuno vespera es de disanto. _A fast day is the eve of a
feast day._

El dia de calor, ese te arropa mejor. _On a hot day muffle yourself the
more._

El dia que no escobé entró quien, no piense. _The day I did not sweep
the house, there came to it one I did not expect._

El dia que no me afeyté, vino á mi casa quien no pensé. _The day I did
not make my toilette, there came to my house one I did not expect._

El dia que te casas, ó te matas ó te sanas. _The day you marry ’tis
either kill or cure._

El dinero hace lo malo bueno. _Money turns bad into good._

El estiercol no es santo, mas do cae hace milagro. _Dung is no saint,
but where it falls it works miracles._

El golpe de la sarten, aunque no duele, tizna. _A blow from a
frying-pan, if it does not hurt, smuts._

El habito no hace al monge. _The dress does not make the friar._

El hijo del asno dos veces rozna al dia. _The son of an ass brays twice
a day._

El hijo sabe que conoce á su padre. _It is a wise son that knows his
own father._

El hilo por lo mas delgado quiebra. _The thread breaks where it is
thinnest._

El hombre es el fuego, la muger la estopa; viene el diablo y sopla.
_Man is fire, woman is tow; the devil comes with a bellows._

El hombre necesitado cada año apedreado. _The poor man has his crop
destroyed by hail every year._

El hombre propone, y Dios dispone. _Man proposes, and God disposes._

El huego y el amor no dicen: Vate á tu lavor. _Fire and love do not say
“Go to your work.”_

El huesped y el pez á tres dias huele. _A guest and a fish stink in
three days._

El hurtar es cosa linda, si colgasen por la pretina. _Stealing would be
a nice thing, if thieves were hanged by the girdle._

El infierno está lleno de buenas palabras. _Hell is full of good
intentions._

El invierno es ido, y el verano venido, mal haya quien bien nos hizo.
_The winter is gone, the spring is come, a fig for those who us good
have done._

El judío échase á perder con pascuas, el moro con bodas, y el cristiano
con escrituras. _The Jew ruins himself with passovers, the Moor with
wedding feasts, and the Christian with lawsuits._

El lobo do halla un cordero, busca otro. _Where the wolf gets one lamb
it looks for another._

El lobo do mane daño no hace. _The wolf commits no mischief at home._

El lobo hace entre semana por donde no va el Domingo á misa. _The wolf
does that in the course of the week which hinders him from going to
mass on Sunday._

El lobo pierde los dientes, mas no los mientes. _The wolf loses his
teeth, but not his inclinations._

El lobo y la vulpeja ambos son de una conseja. _The wolf and the fox
are both in one story._

El mal de milano, las alas quebradas y el pico sano. _The kite’s
malady, its wings broken and its beak sound._

El mal entra á brazadas, y sale á pulgaradas. _Ill luck enters by
fathoms and departs by inches._

El malo siempre piensa engaño. _The bad man always suspects knavery._

El mal que de tu boca sale, en tu seno se cae. _The evil which issues
from thy mouth falls into thy bosom._

El mal que no tiene cura es locura. _Folly is the most incurable of
maladies._

El marido antes con un ojo que con un hijo. _A husband with one eye
rather than with a son._

El mejor lance de los dados es no jugarlos. _The best cast at dice is
not to play._

El mejor pienso del cavallo es el ojo de su amo. _The best feed of a
horse is his master’s eye._

El melon y la muger malos son de conocer. _A melon and a woman are hard
to know._

El mentir no tiene alcabala. _There is no tax upon lying._

El mentir y el compadrar ambos audan á la par. _Lying and gossipping go
hand in hand._

El mozo perezoso por no dar un paso da ocho. _The lazy servant to save
one step takes eight._

El mur que no sabe mas de un horado, presto le toma el gato. _The mouse
that knows but one hole is soon caught by the cat._

El oficial que no miente, sálgase de entre la gente. _The official who
can’t lie may as well be out of the world._

El ojo del amo engorda el caballo. _The eye of the master fattens the
steed._

El ojo limpiale con el codo. _Wipe your eye with your elbow._

El pan comido, la compañía deshecha. _The bread eaten, the company
departed._

El perro del herrero duerme á las martilladas, y despierta á las
dentelladas. _The smith’s dog sleeps at the noise of the hammer, and
wakes at the grinding of teeth._

El perro del hortelano ni come las berzas, ni las deja comer al
estraño. _The gardener’s dog neither eats greens nor lets any one else
eat them._

El perro del hortelano, ni hambriento ni harto. _The gardener’s dog,
neither full nor hungry._

El perro viejo, si ladra, da consejo. _When the old dog barks he gives
counsel._

El pie del dueño estierco para la heredad. _The master’s foot is manure
for the estate._

El porfiado albardan comerá de tu pan. _The busy fly is in every man’s
dish._

El puerco sarnoso revuelve la pocilga. _A measly hog infects the whole
sty._

El que á su enemigo popa, á sus manos muere. _He who trifles with his
enemy dies by his hand._

El que es enemigo de la novia, como dirá bien de la boda? _How shall
the enemy of the bride speak well of the wedding?_

El que está en el lodo querria meter á otro. _He who is in the mud
likes to get another into it._

El que está en la aceña muele, que no el que va y viene. _He who
remains in the mill grinds, not he who goes to and fro._

El que fué monacelo, y despues abad, sabe lo que hacen los mozos tras
el altar. _He who has been first a novice and then an abbot, knows what
the boys do behind the altar._

El que ha ovejas, ha pellejas. _He who has sheep has fleeces._

El que ley establece, guardarla debe. _He who makes a law should keep
it._

El que no duda, no sabe cosa alguna. _He who doubts nothing knows
nothing._

El que no tiene casa de suyo, vecino es de todo el mundo. _He who has
no house of his own is everywhere at home._

El que no tiene muger, cada dia la mata; mas quien la tiene, bien se la
guarda. _He who has no wife, is for thrashing her daily; but he that
has one, takes care of her._

El que tarda, recauda. _He who delays, gathers._

El que tiene tejados de vidrio, no tire piedras al de su vecino.
_He whose house is tiled with glass should not throw stones at his
neighbour’s._

El rayo y el amor, la ropa sana y quemado el corazon. _With lightning
and with love, the clothes sound, the heart burned._

El rey va hasta do puede, y no hasta do quiere. _The king goes as far
as he can, not so far as he would._

El ruin barbero ni deja pelo ni cuero. _The bad barber leaves neither
hair nor skin._

El sol me luzga, que de la luna no he cura. _Let the sun shine on me,
for I care not for the moon._

El tocino de paraiso para el casado no arrepiso. _The bacon of paradise
for the married man that does not repent._

El tramposo presto engaña al codicioso. _The sharper soon cheats the
covetous man._

El usar saca oficial. _Practice makes perfect._

El viejo en su tierra y el mozo en la agena, mienten de una manera.
_The old man at home, and the young abroad, lie after the same fashion._

El viejo por no poder, y el mozo por no saber, dejan las cosas perder.
_The old for want of ability, and the young for want of knowledge, let
things be lost._

El vientre ayuno no oye á ninguno. _A hungry belly listens to no one._

El vino anda sin calças. _Wine wears no breeches._

El vino bueno no ha menester pregonero. _Good wine needs no crier._

En arca abierta el justo peca. _The righteous man sins before an open
chest._

En boca cerrada no entra mosca. _No fly gets into a shut mouth._

En buen dia buenas obras. _The better day the better deed._

En cada tierra su uso. _Every country has its custom._

En casa del ahorcado no se ha de mentar la soga. _Never speak of a rope
in the house of a man who was hanged._

En casa del gaitero todos son danzantes. _In the bagpiper’s house they
are all dancers._

En casa del herrero cuchillo de palo. _In a smith’s house the knife is
wooden._

En casa del moro no hables algarabía. _Do not talk Arabic in the house
of a Moor._

En casa de muger rica, ella manda siempre, y él nunca. _In the rich
woman’s house she always commands; he never._

En caza y en amores, entras quando quieres, y sales quando puedes. _In
hunting and in love you begin when you like and leave off when you can._

Encomendar las ovejas al lobo. _To commit the sheep to the care of the
wolf._

En el almoneda tien la boca queda. _At an auction keep your mouth shut._

En el mejor paño cae la raza. _The best cloth has uneven threads._

En el paño mas fino se ve mas la mancha. _A spot shows most on the
finest cloth._

En el rio do no hay pezes por demas es echar redes. _It is in vain to
cast nets in a river where there are no fish._

Engáñame en el precio, y no en lo que merco. _Cheat me in the price and
not in the goods._

En hora buena vengais, mal, si viens solo. _Welcome, misfortune, if
thou comest alone._

En la boda quien menos come es la novia. _At the wedding-feast the
least eater is the bride._

En quanto fué nuera, nunca tuve buena suegra, y en quanto fuí suegra,
nunca tuve buena nuera. _As long as I was a daughter-in-law I never had
a good mother-in-law, and as long as I was a mother-in-law I never had
a good daughter-in-law._

En salvo está el que repica. _He is out of danger who rings the
alarm-bell._

En tiempo helado el clavo vale un caballo. _In frosty weather a nail is
worth a horse._

Entienda primero, y habla postrero. _Hear first, and speak afterwards._

En tierra de ciegos el tuerto es rey. _The one-eyed man is a king in
the country of the blind._

En tierra seca el agua salobre es buena. _On dry land even brackish
water is good._

Entre dos amigos un notario y dos testigos. _Between two friends a
notary and two witnesses._

Entre dos muelas molares nunca metas tus pulgares. _Never put your
thumbs between two grinders._

Entre tanto que cria, amamos el ama; pasado el provecho, luego
olvidada. _Whilst the nurse suckles, we love her; when she is of no
further use, she is forgotten._

En voto del conde no mates al hombre. _Don’t kill the man at the
count’s desire._

Esa es buena que está al fuego y no se quema. _She is good who is close
to the fire and does not burn._

Esa es buena y honrada que es muerta y sepultada. _She is good and
honoured who is dead and buried._

Escrive antes que des, y recibe antes que escrivas. _Let there be
writing before you pay, and receipt before you write._

Escuchas al agujero, oirás de tú mal y del ageno. _If you listen at a
hole, you will hear ill of yourself as well as others._

Ese es mi amigo el que muele en mi molinillo. _He is my friend who
grinds at my mill._


F.

Fiar de Dios sobre buena prenda. _Trust in God upon good security._

For secreto, lo fumo lo descovre. _Secret fire is discovered by its
smoke._ (Catalan.)

Fraile que pide por Dios, pide por dos. _The friar who begs for God
begs for two._

Frailes sobrand’ojo alerte. _Where friars abound keep your eyes open._

Frailes, viver con ellos, y comer con ellos, y andar con ellos, y luego
vendellos, que así hacen ellos. _As for friars, live with them, eat
with them, and walk with them; then sell them as they do themselves._

Fuego, fuego, muchas ollas y un garbanzo en todas. _Fire, fire, many
pots on, and one pea in them all._


G.

Galgo que muchas liebras levanta, ninguna mata. _The greyhound that
starts many hares kills none._

Gana tiene de coles quien besa al hortelano. _She is fond of greens who
kisses the gardener._

Gato escaldado del agua fria ha miedo. _The scalded cat dreads cold
water._

Gato maullador nunca buen cazador. _A mewing cat is never a good
mouser._

Gloria vana florece, y no grana. _Vainglory blossoms, and bears no
fruit._

Goza tú de tu poco, mientras busca mas el loco. _Enjoy your little
whilst the fool is seeking for more._

Grano no henche harnero, mas ayuda á su compañero. _A grain does not
fill a sieve, but it helps its fellow._

Gran sabor es comer y no escotar. _It is very savoury to eat scot free._

Grano á grano hinche la gallina el papo. _Grain by grain the hen fills
her crop._

Guárdete Dios de hecho es. _God keep you from “It is too late.”_

Guayas! padre, que otra hija os nasce. _Alas! father, another daughter
is born to you._


H.

Habla poco y bien, tenerte han por alquien. _Talk little and well, and
you will be looked upon as somebody._

Habla de la caza, y cómprala en la plaza. _Talk of sporting, and buy
game in the market._

Habló el buey y dijó Mu. _The ox spoke and said “Moo.”_

Hacer la cuenta sin la huéspeda. _To reckon without the hostess._

Hágase el milagro, y hágalo el diablo. _Let the miracle be wrought,
though it be by the devil._

Halagar con la cola, y morder con la boca. _To fawn with the tail, and
bite with the mouth._

Hambre y frio entregan al hombre á su enemigo. _Hunger and cold give a
man up to his enemy_.

Harto es ciego quien no vee por tela de cedazo. _He is blind enough who
cannot see through a sieve_.

Harto es necio y loco, quien vacue su cuero por henchir el de otro. _He
is a great simpleton who starves himself to feed another_.

Hay buena cuenta, y no paresca blanca. _The account is correct, but not
a sixpence appears_.

Haz buena harina, y no toques bocina. _Make good flour, and do not blow
the trumpet_.

Haz lo que bien digo, y no lo que mal hago. _Do what I say well, and
not what I do ill_.

Haz lo que dice el fraile, y no lo que hace. _Do what the friar says,
and not what he does_.

Herradura que chacotea, clavo le falta. _The horseshoe that clatters
wants a nail_.

Hidalgo honrado antes roto que remendado. _A true gentleman would
rather have his clothes torn than mended_.

Hijo del alcalde con todo sale. _The magistrate’s son gets out of every
scrape_.

Hijo no tenemos, y nombre le ponemos. _We have no son, and yet are
giving him a name_.

Hilo y aguja, media vestidura. _Needle and thread are half clothing_.

Hizonos Dios, y maravillámonos nos. _God made us, and we admire
ourselves_.

Hombre apercebido vale por dos. _A man forewarned is as good as two._
(_Forewarned is forearmed._)

Hombre harto no es comedor. _A man that has had his fill is no eater_.

Hombre pobre todo es trazas. _A poor man is all schemes_.

Hombre que no tiene cabeza no ha menester bonete. _He who has no head
wants no hat_.

Huéspeda hermosa mal para la bolsa. _A handsome hostess is bad for the
purse_.

Huir y correr no es todo uno. _To flee and to run are not all one_.

Humo y gotera, y la muger parlera, echan al hombre de su casa fuera.
_Smoke, a dripping roof, and a scolding wife, are enough to drive a man
out of his life_.

Hurtar el puerco, y dar los pies por Dios. _To steal the pig, and give
away the pettitoes for God’s sake._

Huyendo del toro, cayó en el arroyo. _Flying from the bull he fell into
the river._


I.

Id por medio, y no careis. _Take the middle of the way and thou wilt
not fall._

Iglesia, ó mar, ó casa real, quien quiere medrar. _The church, the sea,
or the royal household, for whoever would thrive._

Ira de hermanos, ira de diablos. _The wrath of brothers is the wrath of
devils._

Ir á la guerra ni casar, no se ha de aconsejar. _Never advise a man to
go to the wars, or to marry._

Ir por lana, y volver trasquilado. _To go for wool and come back shorn._


J.

Juego de manos, juego de villanos. _Manual play, clowns’ play._

Jurado ha el vano de negro no hacer blanco. _The bath has sworn not to
whiten the blackamoor._

Juras del que ama muger, no se han de creer. _The oaths of one who
loves a woman are not to be believed._

Justa razon engañar el engañador. _It is fair and just to cheat the
cheater._

Justicia, mas no por mi casa. _Justice, but not in my own house._


L.

La bestia que mucho anda, nunca falta quien la taña. _The beast that
goes well is never without some one to try his paces._

La boca y la bolsa, cerrada. _The mouth and the purse, shut._

La buena vida padre y madre olvida. _Prosperity forgets father and
mother._

La burla dineros cuesta. _Jesting costs money._

La cabra de mi vecina mas leche da que no la mia. _My neighbour’s goat
gives more milk than mine._

La carcel y la quaresma para los pobres es hecha. _Prison and Lent were
made for the poor._

La caridad bien ordenada comenza de sí propia. _Charity well regulated
begins at home._

La casa quemada, acudir con el agua. _To fetch water after the house is
burned._

La codicia rompe el saco. _Covetousness bursts the bag._

La costumbre es otra naturaleza. _Custom is second nature._

La coz de la yegua no hace mal al potro. _The mare’s kick does not harm
the colt._

La cruz en los pechos, y el diablo en los hechos. _The cross on his
breast, and the devil in his acts._

La cuba huele al vino que tiene. _The cask smells of the wine it
contains._

La cuba llena, la suegra bevida. _The cask full, the mother-in-law
drunk._

Ládreme el perro, y no me muerda. _Let the dog bark so he don’t bite
me._

La espada y la sortija, en cuya mano estan. _The sword and the ring
according to the hand that bears them._

La espina quando nace, la punta lleva delante. _The thorn comes into
the world point foremost._

La gala del nadar es saber guardar la ropa. _The secret in swimming is
to know how to take care of your clothes._

La gallina de mi vecina mas huevos pone que la mia. _My neighbour’s hen
lays more eggs than mine._

La gente pone, y Dios dispone. _Man proposes, and God disposes._

La gotera dando hace señal en la piedra. _The gutter by dropping wears
the stone._

La hogaça no embaraça. _One’s prog does not clog._ (_Store is no sore._)

La horca lo suyo lleva. _The gallows takes its own._

La justicia de Peralvillo que ahorcado el hombre le hace la pes quisa.
_Peralvillo justice: hang a man first and try him afterwards._

La lengua del mal amigo mas corta que cuchillo. _The tongue of a bad
friend cuts more than a knife._

La lengua luenga es señal de mano corta. _A long tongue betokens a
short hand._

La letra con sangre entra. _The letter enters with blood._

La mala llaga sana, la mala fama mata. _A bad wound may be cured, bad
repute kills._

La mano cuerda no hace todo lo que due la lengua. _The wise hand does
not all that the tongue says._

La manzana podrida perde a su compaña. _The rotten apple spoils its
companion._

La mas cauta es tenida por mas casta. _The most cautious passes for the
most chaste._

La mas ruin oveja se ensucia en la colodra. _The worst ewe dungs in the
milking-pail._

La moça como es criada, la estopa como es hilada. _The girl as she is
taught, the flax as it is wrought._

La muger compuesta á su marido quita de puerta agena. _The well-dressed
woman draws her husband away from another woman’s door._

La muger del ciego para quien se affeyta? _For whom does the blind
man’s wife adorn herself?_

La muger hermosa ó loca ó presuntuosa. _A handsome woman is either
silly or vain._

La muger polida, la casa sucia, la puerta barrida. _The woman in
finery, the house in filth, but the doorway swept._

La muger quanto mas mira la cara, tanto mas destruye la casa. _The more
a woman admires her face, the more she ruins her house._

La muger vieja, si no serve de olla, serve de cobertera. _The old wife,
if she does not serve for a pot, serves for a cover._

La muger y el vidrio siempre estan en peligro. _A woman and a glass are
always in danger._

La muger y la salsa á la man de la lança. _Your wife and the sauce at
the lance hand (the right hand)._

La muger y la tela, no las cates á la candela. _Choose neither a woman
nor linen by candlelight._

La mula y la muger por balagos hacen el mandado. _A mule and a woman do
what is expected of them._

La necesidad hace á la viega trotar. _Need makes the old woman trot._

La occasion hace el ladron. _Opportunity makes the thief._

La oveja harta, del rabo hace manta. _The well-fed sheep makes a cloak
of its tail._

La piedra es dura, y la gota menuda, mas cayendo de continuo, hace
cavadura. _The stone is hard and the drop is small, but a hole is made
by the constant fall._

La pobreza no quita virtud, ni la riqueza la pone. _Poverty does not
destroy virtue, nor does wealth bestow it._

La primera muger escoba, y la segunda señora. _The first wife is a
broom, and the second a lady._

La quinta rueda al carro no hace sino embaraçar. _A fifth wheel to a
cart is but an encumbrance._

La sangre sin fuego hierve. _Blood boils without fire._

Las llaves en la cinta, y el perro en la cocina. _The keys at the
girdle, the dog in the larder._

Las malas nuevas siempre son ciertas. _Bad news is always true._

Las manos blancas no ofenden. _White hands are no offence._

Las sopas y los amores, los primieros son mejores. _Of soups and loves
the first are the best._

Las tripas esten llenas, que ellas llevan á las piernas. _Let the guts
be full, for it is they that carry the legs._

La suegra ha de ser rogada, y olla reposada. _The mother-in-law must be
entreated, and the pot must be let stand._

La telaraña suelta al rato, y la mosca apana. _The spider’s web lets
the rat escape and catches the fly._

La tierra que el hombre sabe, esa es su madre. _The land a man knows is
his mother._

La traicion aplace, mas no el que la hace. _The act of treachery is
liked, but not he that does it._

La una mano á la otra lava, y las dos á la cara. _One hand washes the
other, and both the face._

La vaca harta de la cola haz brigata. _The full-fed cow makes company
of her tail._

Lavar la cabeça del asno perdimiento de javon. _It is a loss of soap to
wash the ass’s head._

La verdad, como el olio, siempre anda en somo. _Truth, like oil, always
comes to the surface._

La vida y el alma, mas no el alvarda. _My life and soul (are at your
service), but not my pack-saddle._

Lleva tu la arteza, marido, que yo llevaré el cedaço, que pesa como el
diablo. _Do you carry the trough, husband, and I will carry the sieve,
which is as heavy as the devil._

Lo ageno siempre pia por su dueño. _What is another’s always pines for
its master._

Lo barato es caro. _Bargains are dear._

Lo mio mio, lo de Juan mi hermano, suyo y mio. _What is mine is my own;
my brother Juan’s is his and mine._

Lo peor del pleito es, que de uno nacen ciento. _The worst of a lawsuit
is that out of one there grow a hundred._

Lo perdido vaya por amor de Dios. _Let what is lost go for God’s sake._

Lo que come mi vicino no aproveche a mi tripa. _What my neighbour eats
does my stomach no good._

Lo que con los ojos veo, con el dedo lo adevino. _What I see with my
eyes I can guess with my fingers._

Lo que hace el loco á la derreria, hace el sabio á la primeria. _What
the fool does at last the wise man does at first._

Lo que hecho es, hecho ha de ser por esta vez. _What is done, is done
for this time._

Lo que la fuerça no puede, ingenio lo vince. _What force cannot do
ingenuity may._

Lo que la loba hace, al lobo aplace. _What the she-wolf does pleases
the he-wolf._

Lo que la muger quiere, Dios lo quiere. _What a woman wills, God wills._

Lo que mucho se desea, no se cree aunque se vea. _What is much desired
is not believed when it comes._

Lo que mucho vale, de so tierra sale. _What much is worth comes from
the earth._

Lo que no acerta en un ano, acerta en un rato. _What does not happen in
a year may happen in a moment._

Lo que no lleva Christo, lleva el fisco. _What Christ does not take the
exchequer takes._

Lo que no quieres para ti, no lo quieras para mi. _What you dislike for
yourself do not like for me._

Lo que saben tres, sabe toda res. _What three know, everybody knows._

Lo que se usa, no se escusa. _What is in use, wants no excuse._

Lo que te dijeren al oido, no lo digas a tu marido. _What is whispered
in your ear tell not to your husband._

Los amenazados comen pan. _Threatened men eat bread._

Los dichos en nos, los hechos en Dios. _Man proposes, God disposes._

Los niños y los locos dicen la verdad. _Children and fools speak the
truth._

Los pies del hortolano no echan á perder la huerta. _The gardener’s
feet do no harm to the garden._

Los que cabras no tienen, y cabritos venden, de donde les vienen? _They
who don’t keep goats and yet sell kids, where do they get them?_

Los yerros del medico, la tierra los cubre. _The earth hides as it
takes, the physician’s mistakes._


M.

Madre, casar, casar, que carrafico me quiere llevar. _Mother, marry me,
marry me, or the gull will fly away with me._

Madre, que cosa es casar? Hija, hilar, parir, y llorar. _Mother, what
is marrying? Spinning, bearing children, and crying, daughter._

Madruga y verás, trabaja y habrás. _Rise early and watch, labour and
catch._

Maja los ajos, Pedro, mientra yo rallo el queso. _Pound the garlic,
Pedro, whilst I grate the cheese._

Mal me quieren mis comadres, porque les digo las verdades. _My gossips
don’t like me because I tell them truths._

Mal se cubre la cabra con el rabo. _The goat can’t well cover herself
with her tail._

Mal sobre mal, y piedra por cabezal. _Ill-luck upon ill-luck, and a
stone for a pillow._

Mañana sera otro dia. _To-morrow will be another day._

Manda y descuida, no se hará cosa ninguna. _Give orders and do no more,
and nothing will come of it._

Manda y hazlo, y quitarte has de cuidado. _Order and do it, and you
will be rid of anxiety._

Manos duchas comen truchas. _Skilled hands eat trouts._

Marihuela, fuiste a la boda? No, madre, mas galana estava la novia.
_Were you at the wedding, Molly? No, mother, but the bride was very
fine._

Marido, no veas: muger, ciega seas. _Husband, don’t see; wife, be
blind._

Mas ablanda el dinero que palabras de caballero. _Money soothes more
than a gentleman’s words._

Mas apaga buena palabra que caldera de agua. _A good word extinguishes
more than a pailful of water._

Mas cerca está la camisa que el sayo. _The shirt is nearer than the
frock._

Mas cerca están mis dientes que mis parientes. _My teeth are nearer
than my kindred._

Mas descubre un hambriento que cien letrados. _A hungry man discovers
more than a hundred lawyers._

Mas hace quien quiere que quien puede. _He who strives to do, does more
than he who has the power._

Mas son los amenazados que los heridos. _There are more threatened than
hurt._

Mas tira moça que soga. _A girl draws more than a rope._

Mas vale cabeza de raton que cola de leon. _Better be the head of a rat
than the tail of a lion._ (_Better rule in hell, than serve in heaven._)

Mas vale con mal asno contender que la leña acuestas traer. _It is
better to strive with a stubborn ass than to carry the wood on one’s
back._

Mas vale el mal conocido que el bien por venir. _Better suffer a known
evil than change for uncertain good._

Mas vale humo de mi casa que fuego de la agena. _Better is the smoke of
my own house than the fire of another’s._

Mas vale mala avenencia que buena sentencia. _A bad compromise is
better than a successful suit._

Mas vale pajaro en mano que buitre volando. _A sparrow in the hand is
better than a bustard on the wing._

Mas vale puñado de natural que almozada de ciencia. _A handful of
motherwit is worth a bushel of learning._

Mas vale que digan, Aqui huyó, que Aqui murió. _Better they should say,
“There he ran away,” than “There he died.”_

Mas vale que sobre, que no que falte. _Better there should be too much
than too little._

Mas vale regla que renta. _Better is rule than rent._

Mas vale rodear que no ahogar. _Better go about than be drowned._

Mas vale ruin asno que ser asno. _Better have a bad ass than to be your
own ass._

Mas vale salto de mata que ruego de hombres buenos. _It is better to
leap over the ditch than trust to the pleadings of good men._

Mas vale solo que mal acompañado. _Better be alone than in bad company._

Mas vale tarde que nunca. _Better late than never._

Mas vale tuerto que ciego. _Better one-eyed than stone blind._

Mas vale una abeja que mil moscas. _One bee is better than a thousand
flies._

Mas vale un toma que dos te dare. _Better one “Take this,” than two “I
will give you.”_

Mas vale vuelta de llave que conciencia de frayle. _A turn of the key
is better than the conscience of a friar._

Mas val perder que mas perder. _It is better to lose than lose more._
(_The first loss is the best._)

Mas ven quatro ojos que dos. _Four eyes see more than two._

Mataras y matarte han, y mataran á quien te matare. _Kill and thou wilt
be killed, and he will be killed who kills thee._

Mejor es dobrar que quebrar. _Better to bend than break._

Mejor me parece tu jarro mellado que el mio sano. _Your cracked jug
seems better to me than my sound one._

Menea la cola el can, no por ti, sino por el pan. _The dog wags his
tail, not for you but for your bread._

Mete mendigo en tu pajar, y hacer se te ha heredero. _Put a beggar into
your barn and he will make himself your heir._

Meter aguja, y sacar reja. _To put in a needle and take out a bar._

Miedo guarda viña. _Fear guards the vineyard._

Mientra en mi casa me estoy, rey me soy. _In my own house I am a king._

Mientra la grande se abaja, la chica barre la casa. _Whilst the tall
wench is stooping, the little one has swept the house._

Miguel, Miguel, no tienes abejas y vendes miel. _Miguel, Miguel, you
have no bees, and yet sell honey._

Mirais lo que bebo, y no la sed que tengo. _You notice what I drink,
and not the thirst I feel._

Mira que ates que desates. _See that you tie so that you can untie._

Mostrar primero la horca que el lugar. _To parade the gallows before
the town._

Mucho sabe la zorra, pero mas el que la toma. _The fox is knowing, but
more knowing he who catches him._

Muchos besan manos que quierian ver cortadas. _Many kiss hands they
would fain see chopped off._

Mucho tiene que hacer quien ha de gustar a todos. _He has much to do
who would please everybody._

Muda el lobo los dientes y no los mientes. _The wolf changes his teeth
but not his disposition._

Muger, no te las cuento, mas doze morcillas hace un puerco. _I don’t
count them to you, wife, but a hog makes twelve puddings._

Muger, viento, y ventura, presto se muda. _Women, wind, and fortune,
soon change._


N.

Nace en la huerta lo que no siembra el hortelano. _In the garden more
grows, than the gardener sows._

Nacenle alas a la hormiga para que se pierde mas aina. _The ant gets
wings that she may perish the sooner._

Nadar y nadar, y á la orilla ahogar. _To swim and swim more, and be
drowned on shore._

Nadie seria mesonero sino fuese por el dinero. _No one would be an
innkeeper but for money._

Necio es, quien piensa que otro no piensa. _He is a fool who thinks
that another does not think._

Necios y porfiados hacen ricos los letrados. _Fools and the perverse
fill the lawyers’ purse._

Ni absente sin culpa, ni presente sin disculpa. _Absent, none without
blame; present, none without excuse._

Ni buen frayle por amigo, ni malo por enemigo. _Neither a good friar
for friend, nor a bad one for enemy._

Ni con cada mal al fisico, ni con cada pleito al letrado, ni con cada
sed al jarro. _Go not with every ailment to the doctor, with every plea
to the lawyer, or with every thirst to the can._

Ni do ni tomo, como judio en sábado. _I neither give nor take, like a
Jew on the Sabbath._

Ni el anzuelo, ni la caña, mas el cebo las engaña. _It is not the hook
or the rod, but the bait that lures._

Ni estoy al vado, ni á la puente. _I am neither at the ford nor the
bridge._

Ni firmes carta que no leas, ni bebas agua que no veas. _Neither sign a
paper without reading it, nor drink water without seeing it._

Ni hermosa que mate, ni fea que espante. _Neither handsome enough to
kill, nor ugly enough to frighten._

Ni judio necio, ni liebre perezosa. _No Jew a fool; no hare lazy._

Ni perder derechos, ni llevar cohechos. _Lose no rights, and commit no
extortions._

Ni rey traidor, ni papa descomulgado. _No king was ever a traitor, or
pope excommunicated._

Ni sirvas á quien sirvió, ni pidas á quien pidió. _Neither serve one
who has been a servant, nor beg of one who has been a beggar._

No asamos, y ya empringamos. _We are not roasting, and already we are
basting._

No asoleges tu mijo á la puerta de tu enemigo. _Do not spread your corn
to dry at an enemy’s door._ (Asturian.)

No ay ladron sin encubridor. _There is no thief without a receiver._

No compres asno de recuero, ni te cases con hija de mesonero. _Do not
buy a carrier’s ass, or marry an innkeeper’s daughter._

No creais, marido, lo que veeredes, sino lo que yo os dixeré. _Don’t
believe what you see, husband, but only what I tell you._

No da quien quiere, sino quien tiene. _Not he gives who likes, but who
has._

No dé Dios tanto buen á nuestros amigos que nos desconoscan. _May God
not so prosper our friends that they forget us._

No dice el umbral sino lo que oye al quincial. _The threshold says
nothing but what it hears of the hinge._

No digais mal del año hasta que sea pasado. _Speak not ill of the year
until it is past._

No diga la lengua por do pague la cabeza. _Let not the tongue utter
what the head must pay for._

No diga nadie, de esta agua no beberé. _Let no one say, “Of this water
I will not drink.”_

No digo quien eres, que tu te lo dirás. _I do not tell thee what thou
art, thou wilt tell it thyself._

No entra en misa la campana, y á todos llama. _The bell does not go to
mass, yet calls every one to it._

No es aquella gallina buena, que come en tu casa y pone en la agena.
_It is a bad hen that eats at your house and lays at another’s._

No es de vero lágrimas en la muger, ni coxuear en el perro. _A woman’s
tears and a dog’s limping are not real._

No es en mano del piloto que dexe el viento su soplo. _It is not in the
pilot’s power to prevent the wind from blowing._

No es nada, sino que matan a mi marido. _It is nothing, they are only
thrashing my husband._

No es tan bravo el leon como le pintan. _The lion is not so fierce as
he is painted._

No falte cibo al palomar, que las palomas ellas se vernán. _Let there
be no lack of food in the pigeon-house, and the pigeons will come to
it._

No falte voluntad, que no faltará lugar. _Where there is no want of
will, there will be no want of opportunity._

No habria palabra mala, si no fuese mal tomada. _There would be no ill
word if it were not ill taken._

No hace poco quien su casa quema: espanta los ratones, y escalientase
á la leña. _He does not a little who burns his house: he frightens the
rats, and warms himself._

No hace tanto la zorra en un año como paga en un hora. _The fox does
not do as much mischief in a year as it pays for in an hour._

No halla agua en la mar. _He cannot find water in the sea._

No hay bestia fiera que no se huelgue con su compañera. _There is no
beast so savage but sports with its mate_.

No hay casa do no haya su calla! calla! _There is no house without its
hush! hush!_

No hay cerradura, si es de oro la ganzua. _There is no lock, if the
pick is of gold_.

No hay ladron sin encubridor. _If there were no receiver there would be
no thief_.

No hay mejor bocado que el hurtado. _There is no choicer morsel than
that which is stolen_.

No hay mejor remiendo que el del mismo paño. _There is no better patch
than one off the same cloth_.

No hay olla tan fea que no halle su cobertera. _There is no pot so ugly
but finds its cover_.

No hay pariente pobre. _No relation is poor_.

No hay peor burla que la verdadera. _There is no worse joke than a true
one_.

No hay peor sordo que el que no quiere oir. _None so deaf as he that
won’t hear_.

No hay placer que no enfade, y mas si cuesta de valde. _There is no
pleasure but palls, and the more so if it costs nothing_.

No hay tal madre como la que pare. _There is no mother like the mother
that bore us_.

No hay tal razon como la del baston. _There’s no argument like that of
the stick_.

No hay tal testigo como buen moduelo de vino. _There is no such witness
as a good measure of wine_.

No hiere Dios con dos manos. _God does not smite with both hands_.

No inventó la polvera. _He did not invent gunpowder_.

No juega Mosé, porque no tiene que. _Moses_ (i. e. _a Jew_) _does not
play because he has not the means._

No lo quiero, no lo quiero, mas échadme lo en la capilla. _I don’t want
it, I don’t want it, but put it into my hood_.

No mata la carga sino la sobrecarga. _It is not the load but the
overload that kills_.

No me digas oliva hasta que me veas cogida. _Call me not olive till you
see me gathered_.

No me llames bien hadada hasta que me veas enterrada. _Call me not
fortunate till you see me buried_.

No piden todos para un santo. _All do not beg for one saint._

No quiebra delgado, sino gordo y mal hilado. _It is not the fine, but
the coarse and ill-spun that breaks._

No se acuerda la suegra que fué nuera. _The mother-in-law does not
remember that she was a daughter-in-law._

No seais hornéra si teneis la cabeza de manteca. _Be not a baker if
your head is butter._

No se hacen las bodas de hongos á solas. _The wedding feast is not made
with mushrooms only._

No se hacen tortillas sin romper huevos. _You can’t make pancakes
without breaking eggs._

No se hizo la miel por la boca del asno. _Honey was not made for the
mouth of the ass._

No se pierde todo lo que está en peligro. _All is not lost that is in
danger._

No se queje del engaño quien por la muestra compra el paño. _Let him
not complain of being cheated who buys cloth by the pattern._

No serás amado si de tí solo tienes cuidado. _You will not be loved if
you care for none but yourself._

No se toman truchas á bragas enjutas. _Trouts are not caught with dry
breeches._

Nos ollos de miña sogra vejo en quando o demo a toma. _I see by my
mother-in-law’s eyes when the devil takes hold of her._ (Galician.)

No son palabras para mi tia, que aun de las obras no se fia. _Words
will not do for my aunt, for she does not put faith even in deeds._

No son soldados todos los que van á la guerra. _All are not soldiers
who go to the wars._

No te alegres de mi duelo, que quando el mio fuere viejo el tuyo será
nuevo. _Do not rejoice at my grief, for when mine is old yours will be
new._

No te tomes con el ollero, que del burro hace dinero. _Don’t scuffle
with the potter, for he makes money by the damage._

No vive mas el leal que quanto quiere el traidor. _The loyal man lives
no longer than the traitor pleases._

Nunca los ausentes se hallaron justos. _The absent were never in the
right._

Nunca mucho costó poco. _Much never cost little._

Nunca pidas á quien tiene, sino á quien sabes que te quiere. _Never
ask of him who has, but of him you know wishes you well._


O.

Obra de comun, obra de ningun. _What’s everybody’s business is nobody’s
business._

Obres son amores, que no buenas razones. _Deeds are love, and not fine
phrases._

O demo á os suyos quiere. _The devil is fond of his own._ (Galician.)

Ojos hay que de lagañas se enamoran. _There are eyes that fall in love
with bleared ones._ (_Fancy surpasses beauty._)

Ojos que no ven, corazon que no quiebra. _If the eyes don’t see, the
heart won’t break._

Olla de muchos mal mejida y peor cocida. _The stew mixed by many is
ill-seasoned and worse cooked._ (_Too many cooks spoil the broth._)

Olla que mucho hierve, sabor pierde. _The stew that boils much loses
favour._

O morirá el asno, ó quien le aguija. _Either the ass will die, or he
that goads it._

Onza de estado, libra de oro. _An ounce of state to a pound of gold._

O rico, o pinjádo. _Either rich or hanged._

Oro es lo que oro vale. _That is gold which is worth gold._

Oveja harta de su rabo se espanta. _The full-fed sheep is frightened at
its own tail._

Oveja que bala, bocado pierde. _The sheep that bleats loses a mouthful._

Ovejas bobas, por do va una, van todas. _Silly sheep, where one goes,
all go._


P.

Paga lo que debes, sabrás lo que tienes. _If you pay what you owe, what
you’re worth you’ll know._

Paga lo que debes, sanarás del mal que tienes. _Pay what you owe, and
be cured of your complaint._

Pagase el rey de la traicion, mas no de quien la hace. _The king likes
the treachery, but not the traitor._

Palabra de boca, piedra de honda. _A word from the mouth, a stone from
a sling._

Palabras azucaradas por mas son amargas. _Sugared words generally prove
bitter._

Palabra y piedra suelta no tiene vuelta. _A word and a stone once
launched cannot be recalled._

Palo de ciego, que sáca polvo de debajo de agua. _A blind man’s stroke,
which raises a dust from beneath water._

Panadera erades antes, aunque ahora traeis guantes. _You used to be a
baker, though now you wear gloves._

Pan ageno caro cuesta. _Another’s bread costs dear._

Papel y tinta, y poca justicia. _Paper and ink and little justice._

Para azotar el perro, que se come el hierro. _If you want to beat a
dog, say he eat your iron._

Para cada jueves no hay un par de orejas. _There is not a pair of ears
for every Jew._

Para el mal que hoy se acaba no es remedio el de mañana. _To-morrow’s
remedy will not ward off the evil of today._

Para los desdichados se hizo la horca. _The gallows was made for the
unlucky._

Pariente a la clara el hijo de mi hermana. _My sister’s son is a
kinsman beyond dispute._

Parto malo, y hija en cabo. _A bad labour, and a daughter after all._

Pasa la fiesta, y el loco resta. _The feast passes and the fool
remains._

Paz y paciencia, y muerte con penitencia. _Peace and patience, and
death with penitence._

Pedir sobrado por salir con lo mediano. _Ask too much to get enough._

Pedra de ygreja oro goteja. _A church stone drops gold._ (Galician.)

Pelean los ladrones y descubrense los hurtos. _When thieves fall out
the thefts come to light._

Penséme santiguar, y quebréme el ojo. _I thought to cross myself, and I
put out my eye._

Pensé que no tenia marido, y comime la olla. _I thought I had no
husband, and I eat up the stew._

Pereza, llave de pobreza. _Sloth is the key of poverty._

Perro alcucero nunca buen conejero. _A kitchen-dog is never a good
rabbit-hunter._

Perro ladrador nunca buen mordedor. _A barking dog was never a good
biter._

Perro lanudo, muerto de hambre, y no creido de ninguno. _A shock dog is
starved and nobody believes it._

Perro que lobos mata, lobos le matan. _The dog that kills wolves, is
killed by wolves._

Peso y medida quitan al hombre fatiga. _Weight and measure save a man
toil._

Pícame Pedro, y yo me lo quiero. _Peter pinches me, and I like it._

Piedra movediza nunca moho la cubija. _A rolling stone gathers no moss._

Piensa el ladron que todos son de sa condicion. _The thief thinks that
all men are like himself._

Piensan los enamorados que tienen los otros los ojos quebrados. _Lovers
think that others have no eyes._

Pierde el mes lo suyo, pero no el año. _The month loses its own, but
not the year._

Piés que son duchos de andar, no pueden quedos estar. _Feet that are
used to move cannot remain quiet._

Planta muchas veces traspuesta ni crece ni tredra. _A tree often
transplanted neither grows nor thrives._

Pobreza no es vileza, ma es ramo de picardia. _Poverty is no sin, but
it is a branch of roguery._

Poca barba, poca verguenza. _Little beard, little modesty._

Poca hiel hace amarga mucha miel. _A little gall embitters much honey._

Poco á poco se va léjos. _Little by little one goes far._

Poco daño espanta, y mucho amansa. _A little loss frightens, a great
one tames._

Pollino que me lleve, y no caballo que me arrastre. _Give me the ass
that carries me in preference to the horse that throws me._

Por amor del bou, llepa lo llop el jou. _For love of the ox the wolf
licks the yoke._ (Catalan.)

Por donde fueres, haz como vieres. _Wherever you may be, do as you see
done._

Por donde menos se piensa salta la liebre. _The hare starts from where
it is least expected._

Por donde va la mar, vayan las arenas. _Where the sea goes let the
sands go._

Por do quiera hay su legua de mal camino. _Whatever way you take there
is a league of bad road._

Por do salta la cabra, salta la que la mama. _Where the goat leaps,
leaps that which sucks her._

Por el alabado dejé el conocido, y vi me arrepentido. _I left what I
knew for what I heard praised, and repented._

Por el hilo se saca el ovillo. _By the thread we unwind the skein._

Por falta de hombres buenos, á mi padre hicieron alcalde. _For the want
of worthy men they made my father alcade._

Porfia mata la caza. _Perseverance kills the game._

Por la calle de despues se va á la casa de nunca. _By the street of
“By-and-by” one arrives at the house of “Never.”_

Por las haldas del vicario sube el diablo al campanario. _The devil
gets into the belfry by the vicar’s skirts._

Por mucho madrugar, no amanece mas aina. _For all one’s early rising,
it dawns none the sooner._

Por mucho que corra la liebre, mas corre el galgo, pues la prende.
_Fast as the hare runs, the greyhound outruns her, since he catches
her._

Por no gastar lo que basta, lo que era excusado se gasta. _Through not
spending enough, we spend too much._

Por nuevas no peneas, hacerse han viejas, y saber las has. _Do not fret
for news, it will grow old and you will know it._

Por oir misa, y dar cebada, nunca se perdió jornada. _Nothing is lost
on a journey by stopping to pray or to feed your horse._

Por ser rey, se quiebra toda ley. _Every law is broken to become a
king._

Por si o por no, señor marido, ponéos la capilla. _Whether it be so or
not, husband, put on your hood._ (_He had told her there was a new law
that every man with horns should wear a hood._)

Por sol que haga no dexes tu capa en casa. _However bright the sun may
shine, leave not your cloak at home._

Por soto no vayas tras otro. _In a wood don’t walk behind another._

Por temor, no pierdas honor. _Do not lose honour through fear._

Por turbia que esté, no digas, de esta agua no beberé. _However foul it
be, never say, Of this water I will not drink._

Por un punto se pierde un zapato. _For want of a nail the shoe is lost._

Por viejo que sea el barco, pasa una vez el vado. _Old as is the boat
it may cross the ferry once._

Por vuestra alma vayan esos pater nosters. _Let those pater nosters be
for your own soul._ (_Ironical, against swearing_).

Pregonar vino, y vender vinagre. _To cry up wine, and sell vinegar._

Prenda que come, ninguno la tome. _Let no one take a pawn that eats._

Primero son mis dientes que mis parientes. _My teeth before my
relations._

Posesion, y buena razon, y lanza en puño. _Possession and good right,
with lance in hand._

Potros cayendo, y mozos perdiendo, van asesando. _Colts by falling, and
lads by losing, grow prudent._

Puerco fiado, gruñe todo el año. _A pig bought on credit grunts all the
year._

Puerco fresco, y vino nuevo, Christianillo al cimenterio. _Fresh pork
and new wine, send a Christian to the churchyard._ (_Kill a man before
his time._)

Puerta abierta al santo tienta. _An open door tempts a saint._

Puesque la casa se quema, calentémonos todos. _Since the house is on
fire, let us warm ourselves._

Pues tenemos hogaças, no busquemos tortas. _Since we have loaves let us
not look for cakes._

Puridad de dos, puridad de Dios; puridad de tres, de todos es.
_A secret between two is God’s secret, a secret between three is
everybody’s._

Puteria ni hurto nunca se encubren mucho. _Whoredom and thieving are
never long concealed._


Q.

Qual el dueño tal el perro. _As is the master, so is his dog._

Qual el tiempo, tal el tiento. _As are the times, so are the manners._

Qual es el rey, tal es la grey. _As is the king, so are his people._

Quando á tu hija le viniere su hado, no aguardes que venga su padre del
mercado. _When a good offer comes for your daughter, don’t wait till
her father returns from market._

Quando ayunque, sufre, quando mazo, tunde. _When you are an anvil,
bear; when you are a hammer, strike._

Quando comieres pan reciente, no bebas de la fuente. _When you eat new
bread, don’t drink water._

Quando Dios amanece, para todos amanece. _When God gives light he gives
it for all._

Quando Dios no quiere, el santo no puede. _When God will not the saint
cannot._

Quando Dios quiere, con todos vientos llueve. _When God pleases it
rains with every wind._

Quando Dios quiere en sereno llueve. _When God pleases, it rains in
fair weather._

Quando el bazo crece el cuerpo enmagrece. _When the spleen increases,
the body diminishes._

Quando el cosario promete misas y cera, con mal anda la galera. _When
the corsair promises masses and candles, it goes ill with the galley._

Quando el diablo reza, engañarte quiere. _When the devil says his
prayers he wants to cheat you._

Quando el Español canta, ó rabia, ó no tiene blanca. _When the Spaniard
sings, he is either mad or has no money._

Quando el guardian juega á los naypes, qué haran los frayles? _When the
prior plays cards, what will the monks do?_

Quando el hierro está encendido, entonces ha de ser batido. _When the
iron is hot, then is the time to strike._

Quando el necio es acordado, el mercado es ya pasado. _When the fool
has made up his mind the market is over._

Quando el rio no hace ruido, ó no lleva agua, ó va muy crecido. _When
the river makes no noise, it is either dried up or much swollen._

Quando el viejo no puede beber la huesa le pueden hacer. _When an old
man cannot drink, prepare his grave._

Quando el villano está en el mulo, ni conoce á Dios, ni al mundo. _Set
a peasant on horseback, and he forgets both God and man._

Quando el villano está rico, no tiene pariente, ni amigo. _When a
peasant gets rich, he knows neither relations nor friends._

Quando en verano es invierno, y en invierno verano, nunca buen año.
_When the summer is winter, and the winter summer, it is a sorry year._

Quando fueres á casa, agena llama defuera. _When you go to a strange
house knock at the door._

Quando fueres por camino, no digas mal de tu enemigo. _When you are on
the road speak not ill of your enemy._

Quando la criatura dienta la muerte la tienta. _When the child cuts its
teeth, death is on the watch._

Quando la mala ventura se duerme, nadie la despierte. _When ill-luck
sleeps, let no one wake her._

Quando llueve en Agosto, llueve miel y mosto. _When it rains in August,
it rains honey and wine._

Quando llueve en Febrero, todo el año es tempero. _When it rains in
February, it will be temperate all the year._

Quando no dan los campos, no han los santos. _When the fields yield
not, the saints have not._

Quando os pedimos, Dueña os decimos; quando os tenemos, como queremos.
_When we ask a favour, we say, Madam; when we obtain it, what we
please._

Quando pobre, franco; quando rico, avaro. _When poor, liberal; when
rich, stingy._

Quando te dieren el anillo, pon el dedillo. _When they offer you a
ring, hold out your finger._

Quando te dieren la vaquilla, acude con la soguilla. _When they give
you the calf, be ready with the halter._

Quando todos te dijeren que eres asno, rebuzna. _When every one says
you are an ass, bray._

Quando una puerta se cierra, ciento se abren. _When one door shuts, a
hundred open._

Quando un lobo come á otro, no hay que comer en el soto. _When one
wolf eats another, there is nothing to eat in the wood._

Quando uno ne quiere, dos no barajan. _Two cannot fall out if one does
not choose._

Quando vieras tu casa quemar, llegate á escalentar. _When thou seest
thy house in flames, go warm thyself by it._

Quando zuga el abeja miel torna, y quando el araña ponzoña. _When the
bee sucks, it makes honey, when the spider, poison._

Quan léjos de ojo, tan léjos de corazon. _Out of sight, out of mind._

Quanto sabes no dirás, quanto vés no juzgarás, si quieres vivir en paz.
_Tell not all you know, nor judge of all you see, if you would live in
peace._

Quatro cosas sacan al hombre de tino, la muger, el tabaco, naypes y
vino. _Four things put a man beside himself—women, tobacco, cards, and
wine._

Quebrarse un ojo para sacar à otro los dos. _To lose one eye that you
may deprive another of two._

Quebrasteme la cabeza, y ahora me untas el casco. _You have broken my
head and now you bring plaister._

Quebreme el pie, quizá por bien. _I broke my leg, perhaps for my good._

Quem jugata co ferro, jugata co demo. _He who plays with a sword plays
with the devil._ (Galician.)

Quem mal quer os seus, no querrá ben os alleus. _He that is unkind to
his own will not be kind to others._ (Galician.)

Queso de ovejas, leche de cabras, manteca de vacas. _Cheese from the
ewe, milk from the goat, butter from the cow._

Qui barat, el cap se grat. _He who hunts after bargains will scratch
his head._ (Catalan.)

Qui de tot es moll, de tot es foll. _Who is tender in everything is a
fool in everything._ (Catalan.)

Quien abrojos siembra espinas coje. _He who sows brambles reaps
thorns._ (_As you sow, so you shall reap._)

Quien acecha por agujero, ve su duelo. _He who peeps through a hole
will discover his dole._ (_Harm watch, harm catch._)

Quien adelante no mira, atras se queda. _He who does not look before
lags behind._

Quien á dos señores ha de servir, al uno ha de mentir. _He who has two
masters to serve must lie to one of them._

Quien al cielo escupe, en la cara le cae. _He who spits above himself
will have it fall on his face._

Quien á los veinte no entiende, á treinta no sabe y á quarenta no
tiene, ruin vejez le espera. _He who at twenty understands nothing, at
thirty knows nothing, and at forty has nothing, will lead a wretched
old age._

Quien amaga y no da, miedo ha. _He who threatens to strike, and does
not, is afraid._

Quien a mano agena espera, mal yanta y peor cena. _He who lives in
hopes, breakfasts ill and sups worse._

Quien á muchos amos sirve á alguno ha de hacer falta. _He who serves
many masters must neglect some of them._

Quien anda al reves, anda al camino dos veces. _He who takes the wrong
road must make his journey twice over._

Quien á su enemigo popa, á sus manos muere. _He who makes light of his
enemy dies by his hand._

Quien á su muger no honra, á si mismo deshonra. _He who does not honour
his wife, dishonours himself._

Quien á su perro quiere matar, rabia le ha de levantar. _He who wants
to kill his dog has only to say he is mad._

Quien á treinta no asesa, no comprará dehesa. _He who at thirty has no
brains, will never purchase an estate._

Quien a veinte no es galan, ni á treinta tiene fuerza, ni á quarenta
riqueza, ni á cincuenta esperiencia, ni será galan, ni fuerte, ni rico,
ni prudente. _He that is not gallant at twenty, strong at thirty, rich
at forty, or experienced at fifty, will never be gallant, strong, rich,
or prudent._

Quien bien ama, tarde olvida. _He who loves well is slow to forget._

Quien bien ata, bien desata. _He that ties well, unties well. (Safe
bind, safe find.)_

Quien bien bayla, de boda en boda se anda. _He who dances well goes
from wedding to wedding._

Quien bien quiere á Beltran, bien quiere á su can. _He who loves
Bertrand loves his dog. (Love me, love my dog)._

Quien bien quiere á Pedro, no hace mal á su perro. _He who loves Peter
won’t harm his dog._

Quien bien quiere, bien obedece. _He who loves well, obeys well._

Quien bien quiere, de léjos ve. _A well-wisher sees from afar._

Quien bien siembra, bien coge. _He who sows well, reaps well._

Quien bien te hará, ó se te muere, ó se te va. _He who does good to you
either dies or goes away._

Quien bueyes ha perdido, cencerros se le antojan. _He who has lost his
oxen is always hearing bells._

Quien busca halla. _He who seeks, finds._

Quien calla, otorga. _Silence gives consent._

Quien calla piedras apaña. _He who is silent gains store._

Quien canta, sus males espanta. _Who sings, drives away care._

Quien come la carne que roa el hueso. _He who eats the meat let him
pick the bone._

Quien come y condensa, dos veces pone la mesa. _He who eats and puts
by, has sufficient for two meals._

Quien come y dexa, dos veces pone la mesa. _A penny spared is a penny
saved._

Quien compra cavallo, compra cuidado. _He who buys a horse buys care._

Quien compra y vende lo que gasta no siente. _He who buys and sells
does not feel what he spends._

Quien con el viejo burló, primero rió y después lloro. _He who made fun
of the old man, laughed at first and cried afterwards._

Quien con lobos anda, á aullar se enseña. _He who goes with wolves
learns to howl._

Quien con perros se echa, con pulgas se levanta. _He who lies down with
dogs gets up with fleas._

Quien con ropa agena se viste, en la calle se queda en cuerpo. _Who
arrays himself in other men’s garments is stripped on the highway._

Quien con tosco ha de entender, mucho seso ha menester. _He who has to
deal with a blockhead has need of much brains._

Quien da lo suyo ántes de su muerte, que le den con un mazo en la
frente. _Who gives what he has before he is dead, take a mallet and
knock that fool on the head._

Quien da presto, da dos veces. _He gives twice who gives in a trice._

Quien de ageno se viste, en la calle le desnudan. _He who dresses in
others’ clothes will be undressed on the highway._

Quien del alacran está picado, la sombra le espanta. _He who has been
stung by the scorpion is frightened at its shadow._

Quien de locura enfermó, tarde sanó. _Whoever falls sick of folly, is
long in getting cured._

Quien desalaba la cosa ese la compra. _He who finds fault wants to buy._

Quien desparte lleva la peor parte. _He who divides gets the worst
share._

Quien de todos es amigo, ó es muy pobre, ó es muy rico. _He who is
everybody’s friend is either very poor or very rich._

Quien dice lo que quiere, oye lo que no quiere. _He who says what he
likes, hears what he don’t like._

Quien dice lo suyo, mal callará lo ageno. _He who tells his own secret
will hardly keep another’s._

Quien dineros y pan tiene, consuegra con quien quiere. _He who has both
money and bread, may choose with whom his daughter to wed._

Quien echa agua en la garrafa de golpe, mas derrama que ella coje. _He
who pours water hastily into a bottle spills more than goes in._

Quien el aceyte mesura, las manos se unta. _He who measures oil greases
his hands._

Quien en la plaza á labrar se mete, muchos adestradores tiene. _He who
works on the highway will have many advisers._

Quien en un año quiere ser rico, al medio le ahorcan. _He who wants to
be rich in a year comes to the gallows in half a year._

Quien en una piedra dos veces tropieza, no es maravilla se quiebre la
cabeza. _No wonder if he breaks his head who stumbles twice over one
stone._

Quien escucha, su mal oye. _Listeners hear no good of themselves._

Quien esta en su tienda, no le achacan que se halló en la contienda.
_He that minds his business at home, will not be accused of taking part
in the fray._

Quien estropieza y no cae, en su paso añade. _He who stumbles and does
not fall mends his pace._

Quién es tu enemigo? Hombre de tu oficio. _Who is your enemy? A man of
your own trade._

Quién es tu enemigo? El de tu oficio. _Two of a trade can never agree._

Quien feo ama, hermoso le parece. _She who loves an ugly man thinks him
handsome._

Quien fia ó promete, en deuda se mete. _He who pledges or promises runs
in debt._

Quien guarda halla. _He who saves, finds._

Quien guarda su poridad escusa mucho mal. _He who keeps his own secret
avoids much mischief._

Quien hace lo que quiere, no hace lo que debe. _He who does what he
likes, does not what he ought._

Quien hace por comun, hace por ningun. _He who gives to the public,
gives to no one._

Quien hace un cesto, hará ciento. _He that makes one basket can make a
hundred._

Quien ha criados, ha enemigos no escusados. _He who has servants has
unavoidable enemies._

Quien ha de echar el cascabel al gato? _Who is to bell the cat?_

Quien ha de llevar el gato al agua? _Who is to carry the cat to the
water?_

Quien la fama ha perdido, muerto anda en la vida. _He who has lost his
reputation is a dead man among the living._

Quien la miel menea, siempre se le pega de ella. _He that stirs honey
will have some of it stick to him._

Quien la raposa ha de engañar, cumplele madrugar. _He who would cheat
the fox must rise early._

Quien las cosas mucho apura, no tiene vida segura. _Who is always
prying into other men’s affairs, leads a dangerous life._

Quien las sabe, las tañe. _Let him play the instrument who knows how._

Quien la vaca del rey come flaca, gorda la paga. _He who eats the
king’s cow lean, pays for it fat._

Quien lazo me armó, en él cayó. _He who laid a snare for me has fallen
into it._

Quien lejos va a casar, ó va engañado ó va á engañar. _He who goes far
from home to marry, goes either to deceive or be deceived._

Quien lengua ha, á Roma va. _He who has a tongue goes to Rome._

Quien lleva las obladas que taña las campanas. _He who receives the
offerings let him ring the bells._

Quien madre tiene en villa, siete veces se amortaza cada dia. _The
servant wench that has a mother in town swoons seven times a day._

Quien mala cama hace, en ella se yace. _As you make your bed so you
must lie in it._

Quien mal anda en mal acaba. _He who begins badly, ends badly._

Quien malas hadas no halla, de las buenas se enhada. _He that has no
ill luck grows weary of good luck._

Quien mal casa, tarde enviuda. _He who marries ill, is long in becoming
widowed._

Quien mas corre, menos vuela. _The more haste the less speed._

Quien mas sabe mas calla. _Who knows most says least._

Quien mas tiene, mas quiere. _The more one has the more one wants._

Quien ménos procura, alcanza mas bien. _He who asks the fewest favours
is the best received._

Quien mucho abarca, poco aprieta. _He who grasps at much holds fast
little._

Quien mucho duerme, poco aprende. _He who sleeps much, learns little._

Quien mucho habla, en algo acierta. _He who talks much is sometimes
right._

Quien mucho habla, mucho yerra. _Who talks much, errs much._

Quien no adoba gotera, adoba casa entera. _He who does not repair his
gutter has a whole house to repair._

Quien no alza un alfiler, no tiene en nada á su muger. _He who does not
pick up a pin cares nothing for his wife._

Quien no aprieta en vallejo, no aprieta en consejo. _He who has no
voice in the valley, will have none in the council._

Quien no castiga culito, no castiga culazo. _He who does not whip the
child does not mend the youth._

Quien no está enseñado á bragas, las costuras le hacen llagas. _When a
man is not used to breeches the seams gall him._

Quien no hace mas que otro, no vale mas que otro. _He who does no more
than another is no better than another._

Quien no miente, no viene de buena gente. _He that does not lie, does
not come of good blood._

Quien no parece, perece. _He who does not show himself, is overlooked._

Quien no se aventura, no ha ventura. _Who ventures nothing has no
luck._ (_Nothing venture nothing have._)

Quien no te conoce te compre. _Let him who does not know you buy you._

Quien no tiene mas de un sayo no puede prestarlo. _He who has but one
coat cannot lend it._

Quien no va á carava, no sabe nada. _He who does not mix with the crowd
knows nothing._

Quien ó A quien Dios no le dió hijos, el diablo le dió sobrinos. _He to
whom God gives no sons, the devil gives nephews._

Quien ó A quien no habla, no le oye Dios. _He who does not speak, God
does not hear._

Quien ó A quien pone los ojos en el suelo, no fies tu dinero. _He who
looks demurely trust not with your money._

Quien padre tiene alcalde, seguro va á juicio. _He goes safely to trial
whose father is a judge._

Quien peces quiere, mojarse tiene. _He who wants to catch fish must not
mind a wetting._

Quien pesca un pez, pescador es. _He who catches one fish is a
fisherman._

Quien poco sabe, presto lo reza. _He who knows little soon tells it._

Quien presta, no cobra; y si cobra, no todo; y si todo, no tal; y
si tal, enemigo mortal. _Who lends recovers not; or if he recovers,
recovers not all; or if all, not such; or if such, a mortal enemy._

Quien primero viene, primero muele. _He who comes first grinds first._

Quien promete, en deuda se mete. _He who promises incurs a debt._

Quien quando puede no quiere, quando quiere no puede. _He that will not
when he can, cannot when he will._

Quien quiere medrar, iglesia, ó mar, ó casa real. _He who would thrive
must follow the church, the sea, or the king’s service._

Quien quiere tomar, conviénele dar. _He who would take must give._

Quien quiere vivir sano, la ropa de invierno traiga en verano. _He that
would be healthy must wear his winter clothes in summer._

Quien quisiere muger hermosa, el sabado la escoja. _He that would have
a beautiful wife should choose her on a Saturday._

Quien quisiere mula sin tacha, ándese á pie. _He who wants a mule
without fault must walk on foot._

Quien quisiere vivir sano, coma poco y cene temprano. _He that would be
healthy, must eat temperately, and sup early._

Quien quita la ocasion, quita el pecado. _He who avoids the temptation
avoids the sin._

Quien ramo pone, su vino quiere vender. _He who hangs out a branch
wants to sell his wine._

Quien se fia de amigo no fiel, buen testigo tiene contra el. _He that
trusts a faithless friend, has a good witness against him._

Quien se guarda, Dios le guarda. _God helps him who helps himself._

Quien se muda, Dios le ayuda. _He who reforms, God assists._

Quien siembra abrojos, no ande descalzo. _He who sows brambles must not
go barefoot._

Quien siempre me miente, nunca me engaña. _He who always tells me a lie
never cheats me._

Quien sirve al commun, sirve á ningun. _He who helps everybody, helps
nobody._

Quien sirve no es libre. _He who serves is not free._

Quien solo come su gallo, solo ensille su caballo. _He that eats his
fowl alone may saddle his horse alone._

Quien su carro unta, sus bueyes ayuda. _He who greases his cart-wheels
helps his oxen._

Quien te cubre te descubre. _That which covers thee discovers thee._

Quien te da el capon, dale la pierna y el alon. _To him who gives the
capon you may spare a leg and wing._

Quien te hace fiesta que no te suele hacer, ó te quiere engañar, ó te
ha menester. _He that is more civil than usual, either wants to cozen
you or has need of you._

Quien tiempo tiene y tiempo atiende, tiempo viene que se arrepiente.
_Who has time yet waits for time, comes to a time of repentance._

Quien tiene arte, va por toda parte. _He who has a trade may travel
through the world._

Quien tiene boca, no diga á otro, Sopla. _Let him that has a mouth not
say to another, Blow._

Quien tiene enemigos no duerma. _He who has enemies, let him not sleep._

Quien tiene hijas para casar, tome vedijas para hilar. _He who has
daughters to marry, let him give them silk to spin._

Quien tiene quatro, y gasta cinco no ha menester bolsico. _He who has
got four and spends five, has no occasion for a purse._

Quien tiene tejado de vidrio, no tire piedras al de su vecino. _He who
has a glass roof should not throw stones at his neighbour’s._

Quien tiene una hora de espacio, no muere ahorcado. _He that has an
hour’s start will not be hanged._

Quien todo lo niega, todo lo confiesa. _He who denies everything
confesses everything._

Quien todo lo quiere, todo lo pierde. _He who grasps all loses all._

Quien tras otro cabalga, no ensilla quando quiere. _He who rides behind
another does not saddle when he will._

Quien tuviere hijo varon, no llame á otro ladron. _He who has a son
grown up should not call another a thief._

Quien una vez hurta, fiel nunca. _He who steals once is never trusty._

Quiéralo Dios, Matea, que este hijo nuestro sea. _God grant, dear wife,
that this son be ours._

Quieres buen mercado? Con el necio necesitado. _Do you want to buy
cheap? Buy of a needy fool._

Quieres hacer del ladron fiel? Fiate de el. _If you would make a thief
honest, trust him._

Quieres que te siga el can? Dale pan. _If you would have the dog follow
you, give him bread._

Quieres ver loba parida? Casa la hija. _Do you want to see a wolf with
young_ (i. e. _an insatiable plunderer_)? _Marry your daughter._

Qui escudella daltri espera, freda la menja. _He who waits for
another’s platter has a cold meal._ (Catalan.)

Quitáron me el espejo por fea, y dieronlo á la ciega. _They took away
the mirror from me because I was ugly, and gave it to the blind woman._


R.

Raposa que mucho tarda, caça aguarda. _The fox that tarries long is on
the watch for prey._

Raton que no sabe mas de un horado, presto le toma el gato. _The rat
that knows but one hole is soon caught by the cat._

Recebido ya el daño, atapar el horado. _To stop the hole after the
mischief is done._

Reniego de cuentas, con deudos y deudas. _Curses on accounts with
relations._

Reniego del amigo, que cubre con las alas y muerde con el pico. _Avoid
a friend who covers you with his wings and destroys you with his beak._

Resfriadas duelen mas las llagas. _Wounds pain most when grown cool._

Rifaban los rocines del vidriero, y él mirando qual daba mejor coz al
compañero. _The glass-dealer’s horses fell out, and he looked on to see
which kicked hardest._

Riñen las comadres y dicense las verdades. _The gossips fall out and
tell each other truths._

Rogar al santo hasta pasar del trance. _To pray to the saint until the
danger is past._

Ruego de grande fuerza es que te hace. _A great man’s entreaty is a
command._

Ruegos porque cante, y ruegos porque calle. _Entreaties to get him to
sing, and entreaties to leave off._

Ruego y derecho hacen el hecho. _Entreaty and right do the deed._


S.

Sabedlo, coles, que espinacas hay en la olla. _Know, cabbages, that
there is spinach in the stew._

Saberlo como su Paternoster. _He knows it as well as his Lord’s Prayer._

Saca lo tuyo al mercado, y uno te dirá prieto y otro blanco. _Tell your
affairs in the market-place, and one will call them black and another
white._

Sacar el ascua con mano agena. _To take out a burning coal with
another’s hand._ (_To make a cat’s paw of one._)

Sacar el pie del lodo. _To draw the foot out of the mire._

Sacarlo de entre los cardos, sacároslo hemos de entre las manos. _Pluck
it from among the thistles, and we will take it off your hands._

Sacar un fuego con otro fuego. _To quench fire with fire._

Sacar un pie del lodo, y meter otro. _To take one foot out of the mire
and put the other into it._

Sacar verdad por decir mentira. _To discover truth by telling a
falsehood._

Sacristan de amen. _An amen clerk._

Salamon pasó por su puerta quando nació, mas no entró dentro. _When he
was born, Solomon passed by his door, and would not go in._

Salga pez, ó salga rana, á la capacha. C_ome fish, come frog, all goes
into the basket._ (_All’s fish that comes to the net._)

Salir de un lodo y entrar en otro. _To get out of one muck into
another._

Salir del lodo, y caer en el arroyo. _Out of the mire and into the
brook._ (_Out of the frying-pan into the fire._)

Saltar de la sarten, y dar en las brasas. _To jump out of the
frying-pan and fall into the fire._

Salud y alegria belleza cria; atavio y afeito cuesta dinero y miente.
_Health and cheerfulness make beauty; finery and cosmetics cost money
and lie._

Sal vertida, nunca bien cogida. _Salt spilt is never all gathered._

Sanan cuchilladas, mas no malas palabras. _Wounds from the knife are
healed, but not those from the tongue_.

Sanan llagas, y no malas palabras. _Wounds heal, but not ill words._

Sangrarle y purgarle; si se muriere, enterrarle. _Bleed him and purge
him; if he dies, bury him._

Sea mi enemigo, y vaya á mi molino. _Be my enemy and go to my mill._

Sease velado, y sease un palo. _Let it be a husband, though it be but a
log._

Seco y no de hambre mas recio es que alambre. _A man that is lean, not
from hunger, is harder than brass._

Señal mortal no quierer sanar. _Not to wish to recover is a mortal
symptom._

Ser alguno un caxon de sastre. _To be like a tailor’s pattern-book._

Ser como el escudero de Guadalaxara, que de lo que dice de noche, no
hay nada á la mañana. _To be like the esquire of Guadalaxara, who knew
nothing in the morning of what he said at night._

Ser como el puerro, tener la cabeza blanca, y lo demas verde. _To be
like a leek, have a grey head and the rest green._

Ser como piojo en costura. _To be like a louse in a seam._

Ser como unas ortigas. _To be like a bunch of nettles._

Ser el sastre del Campillo, que cosia de valde, y ponia el hilo. _To be
like the tailor of Campillo, who worked for nothing, and found thread._

Ser mercader mas va en el cobrar, que en el vender. _To be a merchant,
the art consists more in getting paid than in making sales._

Ser toda hoja sin fruto. _All leaf and no fruit._

Si bien me quieres, Juan, tus obras me lo diran. _If you love me, John,
your acts will tell me so._

Si da el cántaro en la piedra, ó la piedra en el cántaro, mal para
el cántaro. _Whether the pitcher strike the stone, or the stone the
pitcher, woe be to the pitcher._

Si de alguno te quieres vengar, has de callar. _If you want to be
revenged, hold your tongue._

Si el cielo se cae, pararle las manos. _If the sky falls, hold up your
hands._

Si el cielo se cae, quebrarse han las ollas. _If the sky falls there
will be pots broken._

Si el niño lloráre, acallelo su madre, y si no quisiere callar, déxelo
llorar. _If the child cries let the mother hush it, and if it will not
be hushed let it cry._

Siembra trigo en barrial, y pón viña en cascajal. _Sow corn in clay,
and plant vines in sand._

Siéntate en tu lugar, no te harán levantar. _Seat yourself in your
place and you will not be made to quit it._

Si esta pella á la pared no pega, á lo menos dexará señal. _If this
ball does not stick to the wall it will at least leave a mark._

Siete es convite, y nueve es convicio. _Seven is company, and nine
confusion._ (_Alluding to a dinner party._)

Siete hermanos en un consejo, de lo tuerto hacen derecho. _Seven
brothers in a council make wrong right._

Si la locura fuese dolores, en cada casa darian voces. _If folly were a
pain, there would be groaning in every house._

Si la piedra da en el cántaro, mal para el cántaro; y si el cántaro da
en la piedra, mal para el cántaro. _If the pitcher knocks against a
stone, woe to the pitcher; and if the stone knocks against the pitcher,
woe to the pitcher._

Si lo cena, no lo almuerza. _If you eat it up at supper, you cannot
have it at breakfast._

Si no va el otero á Mahoma, vaya Mahoma al otero. _If the mountain will
not go to Mahomet, Mahomet must go to the mountain._

Si quieres buena fama, no te dé el sol en la cama. _If you would
acquire fame, let not the sun shine on you in bed._

Si quieres dar de palos á tu muger, pídele al sol á beber. _If you want
to thrash your wife, ask her for a drink of water in the sun._

Si quieres enfermar, lavate la cabeza y vete á echar. _If you want to
be dead, wash your head and go to bed._

Si quieres ser bien servido, sírvete a tú mismo. _If you wish to be
well served, serve yourself._

Si quieres ver quanto vale un ducado, búscalo prestado. _If you want to
know what a ducat is worth, try to borrow one._

Sirve á señor, y sabrás que es dolor. _Serve a lord and you’ll know
what is grief._

Si secretos quieres saber, buscalos en el pesar ó en el placer. _If you
want to know secrets, seek for them in trouble or in pleasure._

Si se perdieron los anillos, aquí quedáron los dedillos. _If the rings
are lost, here are the fingers still._

Si soy bobo, meteme el dedo en la boca. _If I am a fool, put your
finger in my mouth._

Si tienes médico amigo, quitale la gorra y envialo á casa de tu
enemigo. _If you have a friend who is a doctor, make your bow and send
him to the house of your enemy._

Si uno dos y tres te dicen que eres asno, ponte un rabo. _If one, two,
three say you are an ass, put on a tail._

Sobre brevas vino bebas. _Drink wine upon figs._

Sobre gusto no ha disputa. _There is no disputing about taste._

Sobre peras vino bebas, y sea tanto que naden ellas. _After stuffing
pears within, drink old wine until they swim._

Sobre un huevo pone la gallina. _The hen lays upon an egg._

So el sayal, hay al. _Under the sackcloth there is something hid._

Soltero, pavon; desposado, leon; casado, asno. _Bachelor, a peacock;
betrothed, a lion; married, an ass._

So mi manto al rey mando. _Under my cloak I command the king._

Sopla, herrero, ganarás dinero. _Blow, smith, and you’ll get money._

Soplar y sorber no puede junto ser. _One cannot blow and swallow at the
same time._

So vayna de oro cuchillo de plomo. _Under a gold sheath a leaden knife._


T.

Tan grande es el yerro como el que yerra. _The fault is as great as he
that commits it._

Tantas veces va el cántaro á la fuente, que dexa el asa ó la frente.
_The pitcher goes so often to the well, that it leaves its handle or
its mouth._

Tanto es Pedro de Dios, que no le medra Dios. _Peter is so godly that
God does not improve his condition._

Tanto quiere el diablo á su hijo que le quiebra el ojo. _The devil is
so fond of his son that he put out his eye._

Tener á alguno en ascuas. _To keep one upon hot coals._

Tener el pie en dos zapatos. _To have the foot in two shoes._

Tener el seso en los calcañares. _To have one’s brains in one’s heels._

Tener la barriga á la boca. _To have the belly up to one’s mouth._

Tener pelos en el corazon. _To have hairs on his heart._
(_Hard-hearted._)

Tirar coces contra el aguijon. _To kick against the pricks._

Tirar la piedra y esconder la mano. _To throw the stone and conceal the
hand._

Todo camino vá á Roma. _Every road leads to Rome._

Todo es nada lo de este mundo, si no se endereza al segundo. _All
things of this world are nothing, unless they have reference to the
next._

Todo saldrá en la colada. _It will all come out in the soapsuds._

Todos son buenos, y mi capa no parece. _They are all honest men, but my
cloak is not to be found._

Tomar la ocasion por los cabellos. _To take opportunity by the
forelock._

Tomar las calzas de Villadiego. _To take Villadiego’s boots._ (_To take
to your heels._)

Tonto, sin saber latin, nunca es gran tonto. _A fool, unless he know
Latin, is never a great fool._

Trabajar para el obispo. _To work for the bishop._ (_Prayers, but no
pay._)

Traerlo escrito en la frente. _To have it written on his forehead._

Tragarse un camello, y no poder pasar un mosquito. _To swallow a camel,
and strain at a gnat._

Tramontana no tiene trigo, y el hombre pobre no tiene amigo. _A north
wind has no corn, and a poor man no friend._

Traspasa el rico las leyes, y es castigado el pobre. _The rich man
transgresses the law, and the poor man is punished._

Tras el vicio viene el fornicio. _After one vice a greater follows._

Tras los dias viene el seso. _Sense comes with age._

Tras pared ni tras seto, no digas en secreto. _Do not tell your secrets
behind a wall or a hedge._

Trasquilenme en la plaza, y no lo sepan en mi casa. _They may whip me
in the market-place, so it be not known at home._

Tres cosas matan al hombre, soles, cenas, y penas. _Three things kill a
man: a scorching sun, suppers, and cares._

Tres hijas y una madre, quatro diablos para el padre. _Three daughters
and their mother, four devils for the father._

Tripa llena, ni bien huye ni bien pelea. _A full belly is neither good
for flight, nor for fighting._

Tripas llevan corazon, que no corazon tripas. _The bowels support the
heart, and not the heart the bowels._

Triste es la casa, donde la gallina canta, y el gallo calla. _It goes
ill in the house where the hen sings and the cock is silent._

Tu dinero mudo, no lo descubras á ninguno. _Discover not your silent
money_ (i. e. _your hoarded money_) _to anybody._


U.

Una cautela con otra se quiebra. _One knavery is met by another._

Una cosa piensa el vayo, y otra el que lo ensilla. _The horse thinks
one thing, and his rider another._

Una en el clavo y ciento en la herradura. _One stroke on the nail and a
hundred on the horseshoe._

Un agravio consentido, otro venido. _One grievance borne, another
follows._

Una golondrina no hace verano. _One swallow does not make a summer._

Una mano lava la otra, y ambas la cara. _One hand washes the other, and
both the face._

Un amor saca otro. _One love drives out another._

Un asno entre muchas monas, cocanle todas. _One ass among many monkeys
is grinned at by all._

Un cabello hace sombra en el suelo. _A hair casts its shadow on the
ground._

Un lobo no muerde á otro. _One wolf does not bite another._

Un loco hace ciento. _One fool makes a hundred._

Uno levanta la caza, y otro la mata. _One starts the game and another
bags it._

Uno ojo á la sarten y otro á la gata. _One eye on the frying-pan and
the other on the cat._

Unos tienen la fama, y otros cardan la lana. _Some have the fame, and
others card the wool._

Un puerco encenagado procura encenagar á otro. _A bespattered hog tries
to bespatter another._

Un ruin mientras mas lo ruegan mas se estiende. _The more you court a
clown the statelier he grows._

Un solo golpe no derriba á un roble. _An oak is not felled at one blow._

Uso hace maestro. _Practice makes perfect._


V.

Vallestero que mal tira, presto tiene la mentira. _The archer that
shoots badly has a lie ready._

Van a misa los zapateros, ruegan a Dios que mueran carneros.
_Shoemakers go to mass and pray that sheep may die._

Vanse los gatos, y estiendense los ratos. _When the cat’s away the rats
will play._

Vaso malo nunca cae de mano. _A crazy vessel never falls from the hand._

Vaya con Dios, que un pan me lleva. _Go in God’s name, for he takes a
loaf of mine._

Vende público y compra secreto. _Sell publicly and buy privately._

Vender gato por liebre. _To sell a cat for a hare._

Vender miel al colmenero. _To sell honey to the beekeeper._

Ventura te dé Dios, hijo, que saber poco te basta. _God give you luck,
my son, for little wit must serve your turn._

Ver el cielo por un embudo. _To see the sky through a funnel._

Ver, oir y callar. _See, hear, and hold your tongue._

Verse alguno en calzas prietas. _To find oneself in tight breeches._
(_Ill at ease—we say in tight boots._)

Viejo como la sarna. _As old as the itch._

Viene ventura á quien la procura. _Luck comes to those who look after
it._

Viento y ventura poco dura. _Wind and good luck are seldom lasting._

Vino acedo, y tocino añejo, y pan de centeno, sostienen la casa en
peso. _Sour wine, old bacon, and rye bread keep a house rich._

Vino que es bueno no ha menester pregonero. _Good wine needs no crier._

Viuda lozana, ó casada, ó sepultada, ó emparedada. _A buxom widow must
be married, buried, or cloistered._

Viva quien vence. _Long life to the conqueror._

Vos doña, yo doña, quien botara á porca fora. _You a lady, I a lady,
who is to put the sow out of doors?_ (Galician.)

Voz del pueblo es voz de Dios. _The voice of the people is the voice of
God._


X.

Xabonar cabeza de asno, perdimiento de xabon. _To lather an ass’s head
is only wasting soap._


Y.

Yerba mala no le empece la helada. _Ill weeds are not hurt by the
frost._

Yo como tú y tú como yo, el diablo te me dió. _I am like you and you
like me, the devil united us._

Yo dueña y vos doncella, quien barrerá la casa? _I mistress and you
miss, who is to sweep the house?_

Yo duro y vos duro, quien llevará lo maduro. _I stubborn and you
stubborn, who is to carry the load?_

Yo molondron, tu molondrona, cásate conmigo, Antonia. _I a lazy lout,
you a lazy lout, marry me, Antonia._

Yo sé que me sé, mas de esto callar me he. _I know what I know, but
will say nothing about it._


Z.

Zapatero, á tu zapato. _Shoemaker, stick to your last._

Zorro en zorrera el humo lo echa fuera. _When a fox is in his hole, the
smoke fetches him out._

Zurrar á uno la badana. _To thrash one’s jacket._




PORTUGUESE PROVERBS.


A.

A adem, a mulher, e a cabra, he má cousa sendo magra. _A goose, a
woman, and a goat, are bad things lean._

A agoa o dá, a agoa o leva. _What water gives, water takes away._

A agoa tudo lava. _Water washes everything._

A amigo naõ encubras teu segredo, que darás causa a perdelo. _Conceal
not your secret from your friend, or you deserve to lose him._

A apressada pergunta, vagarosa resposta. _To a hasty question a
leisurely answer._

Abaixaõ-se as cadeiras, levantaõ-se as tripeças. _Chairs sink and
stools rise._

Abaixaõ-se os muros, levantaõ-se os monturos. _Walls sink and dunghills
rise._

A besta comedeira pedras, na cevadeira. _For a voracious beast pebbles
in his feed._

A besta que muito anda, nunca falta quem tanja. _The beast that goes
well never wants a rider to try its paces._

A boca naõ admitte fiador. _The belly does not accept bail._

A boi velho naõ cates abrigo. _You need not find a shelter for an old
ox._

Abraçou-se o asno com a ameixieira, e acharaõ-se parentes. _The ass
embraced the thistle, and they found themselves relations._

Abre tua bolsa, abrirei a minha boca. _Open your purse, and I will open
my mouth._

A cabra de minha visinha, mais leite dá que a minha. _My neighbour’s
goat gives more milk than mine._

A caõ mordido todos o mordem. _All bite the bitten dog._

A carne de lobo dente de caõ. _To wolf’s flesh dog’s teeth._

A casa do amigo rico irás sendo requerido, e a casa do necessitado sem
ser chamado. _Go to your rich friend’s house when invited; to your poor
friend’s without invitation._

Accommodar o pé ao sapato, e naõ o sapato ao pé. _Fit the foot to the
shoe, not the shoe to the foot._

Acenai ao discreto, dai-o por feito. _Give a hint to the man of sense,
and consider the thing done._ (_A word to the wise is enough._)

Achaques ao odre, que sabe ao pez. _The wine-skin has its reasons for
smelling of pitch._

A chave na cinta faz a mim boa, e á minha visinha. _The key at the
girdle keeps me good and my neighbour too._

Achou o cego hum dinheiro. _The blind man has picked up a coin._

Acompanha com os bons, e séras hum delles. _Keep good company and you
shall be of the number._

A dor de cabeça minha, e as vaccas nossas. _The headache is mine and
the cows are ours._

A espada e o annel, segundo a maõ em que estiver. _The sword and the
ring according to the hand that bears them._

A falta do amigo ha de se conhecer, mas naõ aborrecer. _A friend’s
fault should be known but not abhorred._

A gallinha aparta-lhe o ninho, e pôr-te-ha o ovo. _Prepare a nest for
the hen and she will lay eggs for you._

A gente pobre moeda miuda. _For poor people small coin._

Agoa molle em pedra dura, tanto dá, até que fura. _Soft water
constantly striking the hard stone, wears it at last._

Agoa salobra na terra secca he doce. _Brackish water is sweet in a
drought._

A homem ventureiro a filha lhe nasce primeiro. _The lucky man has a
daughter for his firstborn._

Ainda nao sellamos, ja cavalgamos. _We have not saddled and yet we are
riding._

Ainda que a garça voe alta, o falcaõ a mata. _Though the heron flies
high the falcon kills it._

Ainda que somos negros, gente somos, e alma temos. _Though we are
negroes, we are men, and have souls._

Ainda que teu sabujo he manso, naõ o mordas no beiço. _Though your
mastiff be gentle, do not bite his lip._

Alcança quem naõ cança. _Who faints not, achieves._

Alfaiate mal vestido, sapateiro mal calçado. _The tailor ill-dressed,
the shoemaker ill-shod._

Alchimia he provada, ter renda, e naõ gastar nada. _It is approved
alchemy to have an income and spend nothing._

A lingua longa he sinal de maõ curta. _A long tongue betokens a short
hand._

A má lingua, tesoura. _For a bad tongue scissors._

A máo bácoro, boa lande. _To the lean pig a fat acorn._

Amar, e saber naõ póde ser. _To love and be wise is incompatible._

Ama-se a traiçaõ, aborrece-se o traidor. _The treason approved, the
traitor abhorred._

A má visinha dá a agulha sem linha. _The bad neighbour gives a needle
without thread._

Ameaça muitos, quem affronta hum. _He threatens many who affronts one._

Amigo de bom tempo, muda-se com o vento. _A fair-weather friend changes
with the wind._

Amigo de todos, e de nenhum, tudo he hum. _Everybody’s friend or
nobody’s friend, is all one._

Amigo quebrado soldará, mas naõ sarará. _Broken friendship may be
soldered but can never be made sound._

Amigos e mulas fallecem a duras. _Friends and mules fail us at hard
passes._

A mingoa de paõ, boas saõ tortas. _In default of bread, meal cakes are
good._

A molher, e a gallinha por andar se perde asinha. _A woman and a hen
are soon lost through gadding._

A molher, e a ovelha com cedo a cortelha. _Your wife and sheep early at
home._

A molher, e o vidro, sempre estaõ em perigo. _Women and glass are
always in danger._

Amor, e senhoria, naõ quer companhia. _Love and lordship like not
fellowship._

Amor louco, eu por ti, e tu por outro. _Mad love, I for you and you for
another._

Amor naõ tem lei. _Love has no law._

A mórtos, e a idos, naõ ha amigos. _The dead and the absent have no
friends._

A mouro morto, graõ lançada. _A great thrust of a lance at a dead Moor._

A muita cautela, damno naõ causa. _Much caution does no harm._

A muita cera queima a igreja. _Too much wax burns the church._

A muita conversaçaõ he causa de menos preço. _Too much familiarity
breeds contempt._

Andando ganha a azenha, e naõ estando queda. _By going gains the mill,
and not by standing still._

Ande eu quente, ria-se a gente. _Let me go warm and folk may laugh._

Antes a lãa se perca, que a ovelha. _Rather lose the wool than the
sheep._

Antes com bons a furtar, que com máos a orar. _Rather go rob with good
men than pray with bad._

Antes morto por ladrões, que por couce de asno. _Better be killed by
robbers than by the kick of an ass._

Antes que cases, vê o que fazes, porque naõ he nó que desates. _Before
you marry reflect, for it is a knot you cannot untie._

Ao agradecido, mais do pedido. _Give a grateful man more than he asks._

Ao homem ousado a fortuna lhe dá a maõ. _To the bold man Fortune holds
out her hand._

Ao inimigo, que te vira a espalda, ponte de prata. _Make a silver
bridge for a flying enemy._

Ao invejoso emmagrece-lhe o rosto, e incha-lhe o olho. _The envious
man’s face grows lean and his eye swells._

Aonde hirá o boi, que naõ lavre, pois que sabe? _Where shall the ox go
bid he must labour, since he knows how?_

Ao que faz mal, nunca lhe faltaõ achaques. _He that does ill never
wants for excuses._

Ao Rey pertence usar de franqueza, pois tem por certo naõ cahir em
pobreza. _It befits the king to be liberal, for he is sure of never
falling into poverty._

Aos parvos apparecem os santos. _Saints appear to fools._

A outro perro com esse osso. _Throw that bone to another dog._

A paõ duro, dente agudo. _A sharp tooth for hard bread._

A pedra, e a palavra naõ se recolhe depois de deitada. _A word and a
stone once let go cannot be recalled._

A perda, que teu visinho naõ sabe, naõ he perda na verdade. _The loss
which your neighbour does not know is no real loss._

A pouco paõ, tomar primeiro. _Where there is little bread, cut first._

Aquella ave he má, que em seu ninho suja. _It is an ill bird that fouls
its own nest._

Aquella he bem casada, que naõ tem sogra, nem cunhada. _She is well
married who has neither mother-in-law nor sister-in-law._

Aquelle he teu amigo, que te tira do arroido. _He is your friend who
gets you out of a scrape._

Aquelles saõ ricos, que tem amigos. _They are rich who have friends._

A quem dizes tua puridade, dás tua liberdade. _Where you tell your
secret you surrender your freedom._

A raposa dormida, naõ lhe cahe nada da boca. _Nothing falls into the
mouth of a sleeping fox._

Arrenego de grilhões, ainda que sejaõ de ouro. _I hate fetters though
they be of gold._

Arrenego de tigelhina de ouro, em que hei de cuspir sangue _I renounce
the golden basin in which I have to spit blood._

Arrenego do amigo que come o meu comigo, e o seu comsigo. _I renounce
the friend who eats what is mine with me, and what is his own by
himself._

Arrufos de namorados saõ amores dobrados. _Lovers’ quarrels are love
redoubled._

As molheres, onde estaõ, sobejaõ, e onde naõ estaõ, faltaõ. _Women are
supernumerary when present, and missed when absent._

Asno contente vive eternamente. _A contented ass enjoys a long life._

Asno de muitos, lobos o comem. _The ass of many owners is eaten by
wolves._

Asno máo, junto de casa corre sem páo. _A dull ass near home trots
without the stick._

Asno morto, cevada ao rabo. _The ass dead, the corn at his tail._

Asno, que entra em deveza alhea, sahirá carregado de lenhá. _The ass
that trespasses on a stranger’s premises will leave them laden with
wood_ (i. e. _cudgelled_).

Asno, que tem fome, cardos come. _The ass that is hungry eats thistles._

As paredes tem ouvidos. _Walls have ears._

Assaz caro compra, quem roga. _He buys very dear who begs._

As sopas, e os amores, os primeiros saõ os melhores. _Of soup and love,
the first is the best._

As tripas estejaõ cheias, que ellas levaraõ as pernas. _Let the guts be
full, for it is they that carry the legs._

Até á morte, pé forte. _Foot firm till death._

A teu amigo dize-lhe mentira, se te guarda puridade, dize-lhe verdade.
_Tell your friend a lie; if he keeps it secret tell him the truth._

A teu amigo ganha-lhe hum jogo, e bebe-o logo. _Win a bet of your
friend, and drink it on the spot._

A torto e a direito, nossa casa até ao tecto. _Right or wrong, our
house up to the roof._

A verdade, e o azeite andaõ de cima. _Truth, and oil come to the
surface._

A viuva rica, com hum olho chora, e com outro repica. _A rich widow
weeps with one eye and laughs with the other._

Azeite, vinho e amigo, o mais antigo. _Of oil, wine, and friends, the
oldest._


B.

Bácoro fiado, bom inverno, e máo veraõ. _A pig on credit makes a good
winter and a bad spring._

Barba remolhada, meia rapada. _A beard lathered is half shaved._

Barriga quente, pé dormente. _The belly warm, the foot at rest._

Beijo-te, bóde, porque has de ser odre. _I kiss thee hide, because thou
art to be a wine-bag._

Bem ama, quem nunca se esquece. _He loves well who never forgets._

Bem canta Martha, depois de farta. _Martha sings well when she has had
her fill._

Bem canta o Francez, papo molhado. _The Frenchman sings well, when his
throat is moistened._

Bem cheira a ganancia, donde quer que vem. _Gain has a pleasant odour,
come whence it will._

Bem estou com meu amigo, que come o seu paõ comigo. _I am on good terms
with the friend who eats his bread with me._

Bem parece o ladraõ na forca. _The thief becomes the gallows well._

Bem perdido, he conhecido. _A good thing is known when it is lost._

Bem sabe o asno, em cuja casa rosna. _The ass well knows in whose house
he brays._

Bem sabe o gato, cujas barbas lambe. _The cat well knows whose beard
she licks._

Bem toucada naõ ha mulher feia. _No woman is ugly if she is well
dressed._

Bésteiro que mal atira prestes tem a mentira. _The archer that shoots
badly has a lie ready._

Bezerrinha mansa todas as vaccas mamma. _The gentle calf sucks all the
cows._

Boa he atardança, que assegura. _Good is the delay which makes sure._

Boa meza, máo testamento. _Good table, bad will._

Boas palavras, e máos feitos, enganaõ sisudos, e nescios. _Good words
and bad acts deceive both wise and simple._

Boca de mel, coraçaõ de fel. _Mouth of honey, heart of gall._

Bocado comido naõ ganha amigo. _A morsel eaten gains no friend._

Boca fechada, tira-me de baralha. _A shut mouth keeps me out of strife._

Boca que diz sim, diz naõ. _The mouth that says “Yes,” can say “No.”_

Bole com o rabo o caõ, naõ por ti, senaõ pelo paõ. _The dog wags his
tail for your bread, not for you._

Bolsa vasia, e casa acabada, faz o homem sisudo, mas tarde. _An empty
purse, and a finished house, make a man wise, but too late._

Bom amigo he o gato, senaõ que arranha. _The cat is a good friend, only
she scratches._

Bom coraçaõ quebranta má ventura. _A stout heart breaks ill fortune._

Bom entendedor, poucas palavras. _A word to the wise._

Bom principio, he ametade. _Well begun is half done._

Bom saber he calar, até ser tempo de fallar. _It is well to know how to
be silent till it is time to speak._

Bons, e máos mantem cidade. _Good and bad make up a city._

Bons costumes, e muito dinheiro, faraõ a meu filho cavalleiro. _Good
manners and plenty of money will make my son a gentleman._

Boy que me escornou, em boa parte me deitou. _The ox that tossed me
threw me into a good place._

Boy velho, rego direito. _An old ox makes a straight furrow._

Brincai com o asno, dar-vos-ha na barba com o rabo. _Play with an ass,
and he will slap your face with his tail._


C.

Cabra manca naõ tem sésta. _The lame goat does not take a siesta._

Cacarear, e naõ pôr ovo. _To cackle and lay no egg._

Cada bofarinheiro louva seus alfinetes. _Every pedlar praises his
needles._

Cada cabello faz sua sombra na terra. _Every hair casts its shadow._

Cada carneiro por seu pé pende. _Let every sheep hang by its own leg._

Cada cousa a seu tempo. _Everything has its time._

Cada cuba cheira ao vinho, que tem. _Every cask smells of the wine it
contains._

Cada dia tres, e quatro, chegarás ao fundo do sacco. _Three or four
daily will bring you to the bottom of the sack._

Cada formiga tem sua ira. _Every ant has its ire._

Cada hum canta como tem graça, e casa como tem ventura. _Every one
sings as he has the gift, and marries as he has the luck._

Cada hum colhe, segundo semea. _Every one reaps as he sows._

Cada hum em sua casa he Rei. _Every one is a king in his own house._

Cada hum estenda a perna até onde tem a cuberta. _Every one stretches
his leg according to his coverlet._

Cada hum falla como quem he. _Every one speaks as he is._

Cada hum falla da festa, como lhe vai nella. _Every one speaks of the
feast as he finds it._

Cada hum se contente com o que Deos lhe dá. _Let every one be content
with what God has given him._

Cada hum trate de si, e deixe os outros. _Let every man mind his own
business, and leave others to theirs._

Cada hum veja o paõ, que lhe ha de abastar. _Let every man look to the
bread upon which he must depend._

Cada mosca faz sua sombra. _Every fly has its shadow._

Cada porco tem seu S. Martinho. _Every pig has its Martinmas._

Cada qual com seu igual. _Every one to his equal._

Cada qual em seu officio. _Every man to his trade._

Cada qual por si, e Deos por todos. _Every one for himself, and God for
us all._

Cada qual sabe para seu proveito. _Every one is wise for his own
profit._

Cada qual sente o seu mal. _Every one knows where his own shoe pinches
him._

Cada terra com seu uso, cada roca com seu fuso. _Every land its own
custom, every wheel its own spindle._

Cahir da certã na braza. _Out of the frying-pan into the fire._

Cale o que deo, e falle o que recebeo. _Let the giver be silent and the
receiver speak._

Caminha pela estrada, acharás pousada. _Follow the road and you will
reach an inn._

Canta Marta depois de farta. _Martha sings well when she has had her
fill._

Cantaro que vai muitas vezes á fonte, ou deixa a aza, ou a fronte. _The
pitcher that goes often to the well leaves its handle or its spout
there._

Caõ de palheiro nem come, nem deixa comer. _A dog in the manger, that
neither eats nor lets others eat._

Caõ que lobos mata, lobos o mataõ. _The dog that kills wolves, is
killed by wolves._

Caõ que muito ladra, nunca bom para a caça. _The dog that barks much is
never good for hunting._

Caõ que naõ ladra, guarda delle. _Beware of the dog that does not bark._

Caõ que muito ladra, pouco morde. _The dog that barks much, bites
little._

Capaõ de oito mezes, para a meza de Reis. _A capon eight months old is
fit for a king’s table._

Carne magra de porco gordo. _Lean meat from a fat pig._

Casar, casar, e que do governo. _Marry, marry, and what about the
housekeeping._

Casar, casar, soa bem, e sabe mal. _Marry, marry, sounds well but
tastes ill._

Casa o filho quando quizeres, e a filha quando puveres. _Marry your son
when you please, your daughter when you can._

Casarás, e amansarás. _Marry, and grow tame._

Castiga o bom, melhorará; castiga o máo, peorará. _Chastise the good
man, he will grow better; chastise the bad, and he will grow worse._

Cavallo formoso de potro sarnoso. _A ragged colt may make a handsome
horse._

Cavallo, que voa, naõ quer espóra. _A fast horse does not want the
spur._

Cerra tua porta, farás tua visinha boa. _Shut your door, and you will
make your neighbour good._

Cesteiro que faz hum cesto, fara cento. _He who makes one basket can
make a hundred._

Chover no molhado. _To rain upon the wet._

Cobra boa fama, e deita-te a dormir. _Get a good name and go to sleep._

Com agoas passadas naõ moe o moinho. _The mill does not grind with
water that is past._

Coma o máo bocado, quem comeo o bom. _Let him eat the tough morsel who
eat the tender._

Come com elle, e guarte delle. _Eat with him, and beware of him._

Come do teu, e chama-te meu. _Eat of your own, and call yourself mine_
(i. e. _Be my servant and find yourself_).

Como criaste tantos filhos? Querendo mais aos mais pequeninos. _How did
you rear so many children? By being fondest of the little ones._

Como me tangerem, assim bailarei. _As they pipe to me, I will dance._

Conta de perto, amigo de longe. _Short reckonings make long friends._

Contas na maõ, e o demonio no coraçaõ. _Rosary in hand, the devil at
heart._

Coraçaõ determinado, naõ soffre conselho. _A resolute heart endures no
counsel._

Coraçaõ partido, sempre combatido. _Faintheart is always in danger._

Coraçaõ sem arte, naõ cuida maldade. _An innocent heart suspects no
guile._

Corpo bem feito naõ ha mester capa. _A well-formed figure needs no
cloak._

Corvos a corvos naõ se tiraõ os olhos. _Crows do not peck out crows’
eyes._

Couces de egoa, amores para rocim. _The mare’s kicks are caresses to
the colt._

Cuidando donde vás, te esqueces donde vens. _Thinking of where you are
going, you forget whence you came._

Cuidar muitas cousas, fazer huma. _Think of many things, do one._

Cuidar naõ he saber. _Thinking is not knowing._

Curtas tem as pernas a mentira. _A lie has short legs._

Cutelo máo corta o dedo, e naõ corta o páo. _A bad knife cuts one’s
finger instead of the stick._


D.

Dá Deos a roupa segundo he o frio. _God gives clothes according to the
cold._

Dá Deos nozes a quem naõ tem dentes. _God has given nuts to one who has
no teeth._

Dádivas quebrantaõ penhas. _Gifts break rocks._

Dai-me dinheiro, naõ me deis conselho. _Give me money, not advice._

Dai-mo pobre, dar-vo-lo-hei lisonjeiro. _Show me a poor man, I will
show you a flatterer._

Da ma molher te guarda, e da boa naõ fies nada. _Beware of a bad woman,
and put no trust in a good one._

Da maõ a boca se perde a sopa. _Between the hand and the mouth the soup
is lost._ (_Between the hand and the lip the morsel may slip._)

Darei a vida, e alma, mas naõ a albarda. _My life and soul at your
service, but not the pack-saddle._

Dar he honra, e pedir deshonra. _To give is honour, to beg is
dishonour._

Debaixo de boa palavra, ahi está o engano. _Under fair words beware of
fraud._

Debaixo de huma ruim capa jaz hum bom bebedor. _Under a shabby cloak
may be a smart drinker._

Debaixo do sahal, ha al. _Under the sackcloth there is something else._

De bons propositos está o inferno cheio. _Hell is paved with good
intentions._

De casa do gato, naõ vai o rato farto. _The rat does not leave the
cat’s house with a bellyful._

De casta lhe vem ao galgo ter o rabo longo. _It is the nature of the
greyhound to carry a long tail._

Dedo de espada, e palmo de lança, he grã vantagem. _A finger’s length
in a sword, and a palm in a lance, are a great advantage._

De ferreiro a ferreiro naõ passa dinheiro. _Between smith and smith no
money passes._

De grande rio, grande peixe. _From great rivers come great fish._

Deita-te sem cea, amanhecerás sem divida. _Go to bed without supper,
you will rise without debt._

Deita-te tarde, levanta-te cedo, veras teu mal, e o alheio. _Go to bed
late, rise early, you will see your own harm and that of others._

Deixar fazer a Deos, que he santo velho. _He is an old saint, and may
leave it in the hands of God._

De máo ninho naõ cries passarinho. _Do not rear a bird of a bad breed._

De noite todos os gatos saõ pardos. _At night all cats are grey._

Deos ajuda aos que trabalhaõ. _God helps those that help themselves._

Deos consente, mas naõ sempre. _God permits, but not for ever._

Deos he o que sara, e o mestre leva a prata. _God heals, and the doctor
gets the money._

Deos me dé contenda con quem me entenda. _God grant me to dispute with
those who understand me._

De pai santo, filho diabo. _The father a saint, the son a devil._

Depois de rapar, naõ he que tosquiar. _After shaving there’s nothing to
shear._

Depois de vindimas, cavanejos. _Baskets after the vintage._

De porta cerrada, o diabo se torna. _From a closed door the devil turns
away._

De rabo de porco, nunca bom virote. _You can’t make a good shaft of a
pig’s tail._

De ruim a ruim, quem acommette vence. _Of two cowards, the one who
attacks conquers the other._

Despreza teu inimigo, serás logo vencido. _Despise your enemy and you
will soon be beaten._

Dinheiro emprestaste, inimigo ganhaste. _Money lent, an enemy made._

Dinheiro faz batalha, e naõ braço largo. _Money wins the battle, not
the long arm._

Dinheiro he a medida de todas as cousas. _Money is the measure of all
things._

Dize ao amigo teu segredo, e por-te-ha o pé no pescoço. _Tell your
friend your secret, and he will set his foot on your neck._

Dizei-lhe que he formosa, e tornar-se-ha douda. _Tell her she is
handsome, and you will turn her brain._

Dize-me com quem andas, dirte-hei que manhas has. _Tell me with whom
thou goest, and I’ll tell thee what thou doest._

Dizem os filhos ao soalheiro, o que ouvem dizer ao fumeiro. _Children
tell in the highway what they hear by the fireside._

Do bom, bom penhor, e do máo, nenhum penhor nem fiador. _Of the good
man a good pledge, and of the bad neither pledge nor surety._

Doce he a guerra, para quem naõ andou nella. _War is sweet to him who
does not go to it._

Do contado come o lobo. _The wolf eats of what is counted._

Do fogo te guardarás, e do máo homem naõ poderás. _You may keep
yourself safe from fire, but not from a bad man._

Do mal o menos. _Of evils, choose the least._

Donde fogo naõ ha, fumo naõ se levanta. _Where there’s no fire there’s
no smoke._

Donde foste pagem, naõ serás escudeiro. _Where you were a page, be not
an esquire._

Donde tiraõ, e naõ põem, cedo chegaõ ao fundo. _Taking out without
putting in, soon comes to the bottom._

Donde vas, mal? Onde ha mais mal. _Whither goest thou, Misfortune? To
where there is more._

Dôr de mulher morta, dura até a porta. _Grief for a dead wife lasts to
the door._

Do soldado que naõ tem capa, guarda a tua na arca. _From the soldier
who has no cloak, keep your own in your chest._

Duas aves de rapina naõ se guardaõ companhia. _Birds of prey do not
flock together._

Duro com duro naõ faz bom muro. _Hard upon hard does not make a good
wall._


E.

Egoa cançada prado acha. _The tired mare goes willingly to grass._

Elle tem cabeça, pois tambem hum alfinete a tem. _He has a head, and so
has a pin._

Em boca cerrada, naõ entra mosca. _No flies get into a shut mouth._

Em bons dias, boas obras. _The better day the better deed._

Em casa do ladraõ, naõ lembrar baraço. _Never mention a rope in the
house of a thief._

Emprestaste, e naõ cobraste; e se cobraste, naõ tanto; e se tanto, naõ
tal; e se tal, inimigo mortal. _You have lent and not recovered; and if
recovered, not so much; and if so much, not such; and if such, a mortal
enemy._

Em quanto ha vida, ha esperança. _While there is life there is hope._

Em quanto a grande se abaixa, a pequena varre a casa. _Whilst the tall
maid is stooping, the little one sweeps the house._

Engana-me no preço, e naõ no que mereço. _Cheat me in price, and not in
the goods._

Ensaboar a cabeça do asno, perda do sabão. _To lather an ass’s head is
a waste of soap._

Entrar por hum ouvido, e sahir pello outro. _In at one ear and out at
the other._

Erva má, naõ lhe empece a geada. _Ill weeds are not hurt by frost._

Estar como o peixe n’agoa. _To be like a fish in the water._ (_To live
in clover._)

Este hé meu amigo, que móe no meu moinho. _He is my friend who grinds
at my mill._


F.

Fallai no lobo ver-lhe-heis a pelle. _Talk of the wolf and behold his
skin._

Falla pouco, e bem, ter-te-haõ por alguem. _Speak little and well, they
will think you somebody._

Fallar, fallar, naõ enche barriga. _Fine words don’t fill the belly._

Fardel de pedinte nunca he cheio. _A beggar’s wallet is never full._

Faze a teu filho teu herdeiro, e naõ teu dispenseiro. _Make your son
your heir and not your steward._

Faze boa farinha, e naõ toques bosina. _Make good flour and you need no
trumpet._ (So: _Good wine needs no bush._)

Faze bem, naõ cates a quem. _Do good and care not to whom._

Faze da noite, noite, e do dia, dia; viveras com alegria. _Make the
night night, and the day day, and you will live pleasantly._

Fazei-vos mel, comer-vos-haõ as moscas. _Make yourself honey and the
flies will eat you._

Faze mal, e espera outro tal. _Do ill, and expect the like._

Fazenda herdada he menos estimada. _An estate inherited is the less
valued._

Fazer conta sem a hospeda. _To reckon without one’s hostess._

Fazer de huma pulga hum cavalleiro armado. _To make of a flea a knight
cap-a-pie._

Faze-te morto, deixar-te-ha o touro. _Feign death and the bull will
leave you._

Feita a lei, cuidada a malicia. _The law devised, its evasion
contrived._

Ferro, que naõ se usa, enche-se de ferrugem. _Iron that is not used
soon rusts._

Fiandeira, fiai manso, que me estorvais, que estou rezando. _Spinner,
spin softly, you disturb me; I am praying._

Filhos casados, cuidados dobrados. _Children married, cares increased._

Fome, e frio mette a pessoa com seu inimigo. _Hunger and cold surrender
a man to his enemy._

Fugir do fumo, e cahir no fogo. _To get out of the smoke and fall into
the fire._

Fugir do lodo, e cahir no arroio. _To get out of the mire and fall into
the river._

Fui para me benzer, e quebrei hum olho. _I meant to cross myself and
put out one of my eyes._

Furtar o carneiro, e dar os pés pelo amor de Deos. _To steal a sheep
and give away the trotters for God’s sake._


G.

Galgo, compra-lo, e naõ cria-lo. _Buy your greyhound, don’t rear him._

Galgo que muitas lebres levanta, nenhuma mata. _The greyhound that
starts many hares kills none._

Gallinha, que em casa fica, sempre pica. _The hen that stays at home
picks up the crumbs._

Gallo bom nunca foi gordo. _A good cock was never fat._

Gato escaldado da agoa fria há medo. _A scalded cat dreads cold water._

Graõ a graõ enche a gallinha o papo. _Grain by grain the hen fills her
crop._

Guai do filho, que o pai vai ao paraiso. _Alas for the son whose father
went to heaven._

Guardou-se da mosca, e comeo a aranha. _He avoided the fly and
swallowed the spider._

Guarte do homem que naõ falla, e do caõ, que naõ ladra. _Beware of a
man that does not talk, and of a dog that does not bark._

Guerra, caça, e amores, por hum prazer cem dores. _In war, hunting, and
love, for one pleasure a hundred pains._


H.

Ha males, que vem por bem. _There are ills that happen for good._

Hir-se-haõ os hospedes, comeremos o pato. _The guests will go away, and
we will eat the pasty._

Homem apaixonado, naõ admitte conselho. _An angry man heeds no counsel._

Homem apercebido, meio combatido. _He who is well prepared has half won
the battle._

Homem atrevido, odre de bom vinho, e vaso de vidro pouco duraõ. _A rash
man, a skin of good wine, and a glass vessel, do not last long._

Homem de bem, tem palavra, como Rei. _An honest man’s word is as good
as the king’s._

Homem de palha val mais, que mulher de ouro. _A man of straw is better
than a woman of gold._

Homem de teu officio, teu inimigo. _The man of your own trade is your
enemy._

Homem farto, naõ he comedor. _A full man is no eater._

Homem morto, naõ falla. _A dead man does not speak._ (_Dead men tell no
tales._)

Homem nescio, dá ás vezes bom conselho. _Fools sometimes give wise men
counsel._

Homem pobre, depois de comer ha fome. _A poor man is hungry after
eating._

Homem põe, e Deos dispõe. _Man proposes, and God disposes._

Honra ao bom, para que te honre, e ao máo, para que te naõ deshonre.
_Honour a good man that he may honour you, and a bad man that he may
not dishonour you._

Honra e proveito naõ cabem em hum sacco. _Honour and profit will not
keep in one sack._

Hospeda formosa damno faz á bolsa. _A handsome hostess is bad for the
purse._

Huma desgraça alcança outra. _One misfortune brings on another._

Hum aggravo consentido, outro vindo. _One wrong submitted to, another
follows._

Huma maõ lava a outra, e ambas o rosto. _One hand washes the other, and
both the face._

Hum doudo fará cento. _One fool makes a hundred._

Hum graõ naõ enche o celleiro, mas ajuda a seu companheiro. _One grain
does not fill the granary, but it helps its companion._


I.

Ira de irmaõs, ira de diabos. _The wrath of brothers is the wrath of
devils._


L.

Ladre-me o caõ, naõ me morda. _Let the dog bark at me, so he don’t bite
me._

Lá vai a lingua, onde o dente grita. _The tongue goes to the aching
tooth._

Lá vaõ leis, onde querem cruzados. _Laws go where dollars please._

Levantar a lebre, para que outrem medre. _To start the hare for
another’s profit._

Levar agoa ao mar. _To carry water to the sea._

Lobo faminto naõ tem assento. _A hungry wolf is not at rest._

Longe da vista, longe do coraçaõ. _Out of sight, out of mind._


M.

Madruga, e verás; trabalha, e terás. _Rise early, and you will observe;
labour, and you will have._

Mãi aguçosa, filha preguiçosa. _A bustling mother makes a slothful
daughter._

Mãi, casai-me logo, que se me arruga o rosto. _Marry me forthwith,
mother, for my face is growing wrinkled._

Mãi, que cousa he casar? Filha, fiar, parir, e chorar. _What is
marriage, mother? Daughter, it is spinning, bearing children, and
weeping._

Mais abranda o dinheiro, que palavra de cavalleiro. _Money soothes more
than the words of a cavalier._

Mais apaga boa palavra, que caldeira de agua. _A good word quenches
more than a cauldron of water._

Mais asinha se toma hum mentiroso, que hum coxo. _A liar is sooner
caught than a cripple._

Mais barato he o comprado, que o pedido. _What is bought is cheaper
than a gift._

Mais descobre huma hora de jogo, que hum anno de conversaçaõ. _An hour
of play discovers more than a year of conversation._

Mais faz quem quer, que quem pode. _He that will, does more than he
that can._

Mais quero asno que me leve, que cavallo que me derrube. _Better an ass
that carries me than a horse that throws me._

Mais quero para meus dentes, que para meus parentes. _I want more for
my teeth than for my relations._

Mais val arrodear, que afogar. _Better go round than be drowned._

Mais val ás vezes favor, que justiça, nem razaõ. _Favour oft avails
more than justice or reason._

Mais val bem de longe, que mal de perto. _Better a distant good than a
near evil._

Mais val boa regra, que boa renda. _Good management is better than good
income._

Mais val callar, que mal fallar. _Better be silent than speak ill._

Mais valem amigos na praça, que dinheiro na arca. _Better have friends
in the market-place than money in your coffer._

Mais val ganhar no lodo, que perder no ouro. _Better gain in mud than
lose in gold._

Mais val guardar, que pedir. _Better keep, than have to beg._

Mais val hum passaro na maõ, que dous que vaõ voando. _One bird in the
hand is worth two flying._

Mais val hum toma, que dous te darei. _Better is one “Take this,” than
two “I-will-give-you.”_

Mais val merecer honra, e naõ a ter, que tendo-a, naõ a merecer.
_Better deserve honour and not have it, than have it and not deserve
it._

Mais val perder, que mais perder. _Better lose than lose more._

Mais val ruim asno, que ser asno. _Better have a had ass than be your
own ass._

Mais val salto de mata, que rogos de homens bons. _Better is a leap
over the ditch than the entreaties of good men._

Mais val só, que mal accompanhado. _Better alone than in bad company._

Mais val tarde, que nunca. _Better late than never._

Mais vém dous olhos, que hum. _Two eyes see more than one._

Mais vém quatro olhos, que dous. _Four eyes see more than two._

Mal alheio naõ cura minha dor. _Another’s misfortune does not cure my
pain._

Mal haja o ventre, que do paõ comido se esquece. _Ill befal the belly
that forgets eaten bread._

Malhar no ferro em quanto está quente. _Strike while the iron is hot._

Mal me querem minhas comadres, porque lhes digo as verdades. _My
gossips don’t like me because I tell them truths._

Mal vai á casa, onde a roca manda à espada. _It fares ill with the
house when the distaff commands the sword._

Mal vai ao passarinho na maõ do menino. _Ill fares the young bird in
the urchin’s hand._

Manda, e descuida, naõ se fará cousa nenhuma. _Give orders, and do no
more, and nothing will be done._

Manda, e faze-o, tirar-te-ha cuidado. _Give orders, and do it yourself,
and you will be rid of anxiety._

Manda o amo ao moço, o moço ao gato, e o gato ao rabo. _The master
orders the man, the man orders the cat, and the cat orders her tail._

Manda o sabio com embaixada, e naõ lhe digas nada. _Send a man of sense
on the embassy, and you need not instruct him._

Máo he ter moço, mas peior he ter amo. _It is bad to have a servant,
but worse to have a master._

Matar dous passaros com huma pedra. _To kill two birds with one stone._

Melhor he a gallinha da minha visinha, que a minha. _Better is my
neighbour’s hen than mine._

Melhor he curar goteira, que casa inteira. _Better repair the gutter
than the whole house._

Melhor he dar a ruins, que pedir a bons. _Better have to give than have
to beg._

Melhor he dobrar, que quebrar. _Better bend than break._

Melhor he errar com muitos, que acertar com poucos. _Better be wrong
with the many than right with the few._

Melhor he hum passarinho nas maõs, que dous voando. _Better a sparrow
in the hand than two flying._

Melhor he o meu, que o nosso. _Better mine than ours._

Melhor he palha, que nada. _Better straw, than nothing._

Melhor he prevenir, que ser prevenido. _Better anticipate than be
anticipated._

Melhor he rosto vermelho, que coraçaõ negro. _Better a red face than a
black heart._

Melhor he ser torto, que cego de todo. _Better be one-eyed than quite
blind._

Menina e vinha, perál e favál, màos saõ de guardar. _A girl, a
vineyard, an orchard, and a bean-field, are hard to watch._

Mette a maõ no seio, naõ diràs do fado alheio. _Lay your hand on your
bosom and you will not speak ill of another._

Meu dinheiro, teu dinheiro, vamos a taverna. _My money, your money, let
us go to the tavern._

Miguel, Miguel, naõ tens abelhas, e vendes mel? _Michael, Michael, you
have no bees, and yet you sell honey!_

Minha arca cerrada, minha alma sã. _My chest locked, my soul safe._

Moeda falsa de noite passa. _Counterfeit coin passes current at night._

Molher palreira diz de todos, e todos della. _A gossiping woman talks
of everybody, and everybody of her._

Molher, vento, e ventura asinha se muda. _Woman, wind, and luck soon
change._

Molle molle, se vai longe. _Fair and softly goes far._

Morder a quem morde. _Bite the biter._

Mudado o tempo, mudado o conselho. _Other times, other counsels._

Mudar costume, parelha da morte. _To change one’s habits smacks of
death._

Muda-te, mudar-se-te-ha a fortuna. _Change yourself, and fortune will
change with you._

Muita palha, e pouco graõ. _Much straw and little corn._

Muito fallar, pouco saber. _Much chatter, little wit._

Muito folga o lobo com o couce da ovelha. _The wolf is well pleased
with the kick of a sheep._

Muito paõ tem Castella, mas quem o naõ tem, lazera. _There is plenty of
corn in Castile, but he who has none, starves._

Muito pòde o gallo no seu poleiro. _Every cock is valiant on his own
dunghill._

Muito prometter he sinal de pouco dar. _To promise much means giving
little._

Muito sabe a raposa, mas mais sabe quem a toma. _The fox knows much,
but more he that catcheth him._

Muitos beijaõ a maõ, que quizeraõ ver cortada. _Many kiss the hand they
would gladly see cut off._


N.

Na agoa envolta pesca o pescador. _The fisherman fishes in troubled
water._

Na arca aberta o justo pecca. _An open box tempts an honest man._

Na barba do nescio aprendem todos a rapar. _On the fool’s beard all
learn to shave._

Na casa chea asinha se faz a cea. _Supper is soon served up in a
plentiful house._

Nada duvida, quem naõ sabe. _He doubts nothing who knows nothing._

Nada tem, quem se naõ contenta com o que tem. _He has nothing who is
not content with what he has._

Naõ bebas cousa, que naõ vejas, nem assines carta, que naõ leas. _Drink
nothing without seeing it, sign nothing without reading it._

Naõ deixes caminho por atalho. _Don’t leave the high road for a short
cut._

Naõ diga a lingoa, por onde pague a cabeça. _Let not the tongue utter
what the head may have to pay for._

Naõ digas, desta agoa naõ biberei, nem deste paõ comerei. _Never say,
of this water I will not drink, of this bread I will not eat._

Naõ digas mal do anno, até que naõ seja passado. _Speak not ill of the
year-until it is past._

Naõ fiar de caõ, que manqueja. _Trust not a dog that limps._

Naõ fies, nem porfies, nem arrendes, viviras entre as gentes. _Neither
trust or contend, nor lay wagers or lend, and you’ll have peace to your
end._

Naõ há dia sem tarde. _There is no day without its night._

Naõ ha mulher formosa no dia da voda, senaõ a noiva. _There’s no
handsome woman on the wedding day, except the bride._

Naõ ha palavra mal dita, se naõ fora mal entendida. _No word is ill
spoken, that is not ill taken._

Naõ ha prazer, que naõ enfade, e mais se se houver debalde. _There is
no pleasure that does not pall, the more so if it costs nothing._

Naõ he nada, senaõ que mataõ a meu marido. _It is nothing, they are
only killing my husband._

Naõ he o diabo taõ feio como o pintaõ. _The devil is not so ugly as he
is painted._

Naõ he o mel para a boca do asno. _Honey is not for the ass’s mouth._

Naõ he pobre, senaõ o que se tem por pobre. _No one is poor but he who
thinks himself so._

Naõ me apraz porta, que a muitas chaves faz. _Beware of a door that has
many keys._

Naõ me pago do amigo, que come o seu só, e o meu comigo. _He is no
friend that eats his own by himself, and mine with me._

Naõ quebra por delgado, senaõ por gordo e mal fiado. _Threads do not
break for being fine, but for being gouty and ill-spun._

Naõ sejais forneiro, se tendes a cabeça de manteiga. _Don’t be a baker
if your head is made of butter._

Naõ se lembra a sogra, que foi nora. _The mother-in-law does not
remember that she was once a daughter-in-law._

Naõ se pode viver sem amigos. _There’s no living without friends._

Naõ se tomaõ trutas a bragas enxutas. _There’s no catching trouts with
dry breeches._

Naõ te faças pobre, a quem te naõ ha da fazer rico. _Don’t make
yourself poor to one who won’t make you rich._

Naõ tem nada, quem nada lhe basta. _He has nothing, for whom nothing is
enough._

Naõ tem que comer, assenta-se a mesa. _I have nothing for dinner, sit
down to table._

Nasce na horta o que naõ semea o hortelaõ. _More grows in a garden than
the gardener sows there._

Na terra dos cegos, o torto he rei. _The one-eyed is a king in the land
of the blind._

Necio he quem cuida, que outro naõ cuida. _He is a fool who thinks that
others do not think._

Nem barbeiro mudo, nem cantor surdo. _Neither a dumb barber nor a deaf
singer._

Nem com cada mal ao medico, nem com cada trampa ao letrado. _Go not
with every ailment to the doctor, nor with every plaint to the lawyer._

Nem com toda a fóme á arca, nem com toda a sede ao cantaro. _Go not
with every hunger to the cupboard, nor with every thirst to the
pitcher._

Nem estopa com tiçoens, nem molher com varoens. _Trust not tow with
firebrands, nor a woman with men._

Nem por muito madrugar, amanhece mais asinha. _It dawns none the sooner
for all one’s early rising._

Nem tanto puxar, que se quebre a corda. _Don’t pull hard enough to
break the rope._

Nem taõ formosa que mate, nem taõ fea, que espante. _Neither handsome
enough to kill nor ugly enough to frighten away._

Nem todos os que vaõ à guerra, saõ soldados. _All are not soldiers who
go to the wars._

Nem tudo o que he verdade, se diz. _Not all that is true is to be
spoken._

Nem tudo o que luz he ouro. _All is not gold that glitters._

Ninguem he bom juiz em causa propria. _No one is a good judge in his
own cause._

Ninguem se contenta com sua sórte. _No one is content with his lot._

Ninguem se metta no que naõ sabe. _Meddle not in what you don’t
understand._

Ninguem sempre acerta. _No one is always right._

Ninho feito, pega morta. _The nest made, the bird dead._

No rosto de minha, filha, vejo quando, o demo toma a meu genro. _I see
by my daughter’s face when the devil lays hold of my son-in-law._

Nos trabalhos se vem os amigos. _Friends are known in adversity._

Nunca de má arvore bom fruto. _Good fruit never comes from a bad tree._

Nunca falta hum caõ, que vos ladre. _There is never wanting a dog to
bark at you._

Nunca foi bom amigo, quem por pouco quebron a amizade. _He never was a
friend who ceased to be so for a slight cause._

Nunca lobo mata outro. _One wolf does not kill another._

Nunca muito custou pouco. _Much never cost little._

Nunca se matou ouriço cacheiro às punhadas. _Hedgehogs are not to be
killed with the fist._

Nunca se queixe do engano, quem pela mostra compra o panno. _He should
not complain of being cheated who buys the cloth by the sample._


O.

O amigo ha de se levar com a sua tacha. _A friend is to be taken with
his faults._

O amor, e a fé, nas obras se vé. _Love and faith are seen in works._

O amor naõ tem lei. _Love knows no law._

O bem soa, e o mal voa. _Good news is rumoured, bad news flies._

O boi bravo na terra alheia se faz manso. _The savage ox grows tame on
strange ground._

O bom vinho naõ ha mester ramo. _Good wine needs no bush._

Obra começada, meia acabada. _Well begun is half done._

Obra de commum, obra de nenhum. _What’s everybody’s work is nobody’s
work._

Obra feita dinheiro espera. _Work done expects money._

Obras saõ amores, e naõ palavras doces. _Deeds are love, and not sweet
words._

O buraco chama ao ladraõ. _The hole invites the thief._

O caõ velho, quando ladra, dà conselho. _When the old dog barks, he
gives counsel._

O caro he barato, e o barato he caro. _Dear is cheap, and cheap is
dear._

O couce da egoa naõ faz mal ao potro. _The mare’s kick does not harm
the colt._

O dia de amanhã ninguem o vio. _No one has seen to-morrow._

O dinheiro do avarento, duas vezes vai à feira. _Misers’ money goes
twice to market._

Officio alheio custa dinheiro. _Another man’s trade costs money._

Officio de conselho, honra sem proveito. _A seat in the council is
honour without profit._

O filho de tua visinha, tira-lhe o ranho, e casa-o com tua filha. _Wipe
the nose of your neighbour’s son, and marry him to your daughter._

O filho do asno huma hora no dia orneja. _The ass’s son brays one hour
daily._

O fim coroa a obra. _The end crowns the work._

O galgo, à larga, a lebre mata. _In the long run, the greyhound kills
the hare._

O homem he fogo, e a mulher estopa, vem o diabo, assopra. _Man is fire,
woman is tow, and the devil comes and blows._

O homem pobre a dobrado custo come. _The poor man eats at double cost._

O hospede, e o peixe a os tres dias fede. _A guest and a fish stink in
three days._

O ladraõ cuida que todos taes saõ. _The thief thinks that all are like
himself._

O ladraõ da agulha ao ouro, e do ouro à forca. _The thief proceeds from
a needle to gold, and from gold to the gallows._

Olhos verdes, em poucos os veredes. _You will not see many with green
eyes._

O lobo perde os dentes, mas naõ o costume. _The wolf loses his teeth,
but not his inclination._

O mal do olho cura-se com o cotovelo. _Wipe your sore eye with your
elbow._

O mal, que naõ tem cura, he loucura. _The malady that is most incurable
is folly._

O marido antes com hum só olho, que com hum filho. _Rather a husband
with one eye than with one son._

O melhor penso do cavallo, he o olho de seu amo. _The horse’s best
allowance is his master’s eye._

O mentir naõ paga sisa. _Lying pays no tax._

O moço, e o gallo hum sò anno. _A servant and a cock must be kept but
one year._

O moço preguiçoso, por naõ dar huma passada, da oito. _The lazy servant
takes eight steps to avoid one._

Onde a gallinha tem os ovos, là se lhe vaõ os olhos. _The hen’s eyes
turn to where she has her eggs._

Onde entra o beber, sahe o saber. _When the wine is in, the wit is out._

Onde está o gallo, naõ canta a gallinha. _Where the cock is the hen
does not crow._

Onde fogo naõ ha, fumo naõ se levanta. _Where there is no fire, no
smoke rises._

Onde força naõ ha, direito se perde. _Where there’s no might there’s no
right._

Onde ha amigos, ha riquezas. _Where friends, there riches._

Onde ha muito riso, ha pouco siso. _Much laughter, little wit._

Onde irá o boi, que naõ are? _Where shall the ox go, and not have to
plough?_

Onde naõ ha honra, naõ ha deshonra. _Where there is no honour there is
no dishonour._

Onde o lobo acha hum cordeiro, busca outro. _Where the wolf picks up
one sheep he looks for another._

Onde vai mas fundo o rio, ahi faz menos ruido. _Where the river is
deepest it makes least noise._

O olho do amo engorda o cavallo. _The master’s eye makes the horse fat._

O parvo, se he callado, por sabio he reputado. _The fool passes for
wise if he is silent._

O peior porco come a melhor lande. _The worst pig eats the best acorn._

O perro com raiva a seu amo morde. _The mad dog bites its master._

O perro do hortelão naõ come as versas, nem a outrem as deixa comer.
_The gardener’s dog neither eats greens nor lets any one else eat them._

O pouco faz devedor, e o muito inimigo. _A little makes a debtor and
much an enemy._

O que faz o doudo á derradeira, faz o sesudo à primeira. _What the fool
does at last the wise man does at first._

O que he duro de passar, he doce de lembrar. _What was hard to bear is
sweet to remember._

O que naõ pòde al ser, deves soffrer. _What can’t be cured must be
endured._

O rei das abelhas naõ tem aguilhaõ. _The king of the bees has no sting._

O sacco do genro nunca he cheio. _The son-in-law’s sack is never full._

Os dedos da maõ naõ saõ iguaes. _The fingers of the same hand are not
alike._

Os erros dos medicos a terra os cobre. _The blunders of physicians are
covered by the earth._

O sisudo naõ ata o saber á estaca. _The man of sense does not hang up
his knowledge._

Os mortos aos vivos abrem os olhos. _The dead open the eyes of the
living._

O tramposo asinha engana ao cobiçoso. _The swindler readily cheats the
covetous man._

Ouro he o que ouro vale. _That is gold which is worth gold._

Ouve, ve, e calla, se queres viver em paz. _Hear, see, and say nothing,
if you would live in peace._

Ovelha farta, do rabo se espanta. _The full-fed sheep is frightened at
her own tail._

Ovelha, que berra, bocado perde. _The sheep that bleats loses a
mouthful._

O ventre em jejum naõ ouve a nenhum. _A hungry belly hears nobody._


P.

Paga o justo pelo peccador. _The righteous pays for the sinner._

Paga o que deves, sararàs do mal que tens. _Pay what you owe, you will
get well of your malady._

Pagar na mesma moeda. _To pay one in his own coin._

Palavra fóra da boca, pedra fóra da maõ. _A word from the mouth, a
stone from the hand._ (_A word and a blow._)

Palavras de santo, e cenhas de gato. _Saint’s words, cat’s claws._

Palavras naõ enchem barriga. _Words don’t fill the belly._

Panella que muito ferve, o sabor perde. _The pot that boils too much
loses its flavour._

Paõ alheio caro custa. _Another’s bread costs dear._

Paõ comido, companhia desfeita. _The bread eaten, the company departs._

Paz de cajado guerra he. _Peace with a cudgel in hand is war._

Peccado confessado, he meio perdoado. _A fault confessed is half
forgiven._

Pedra movediça, naõ cria bolor. _A rolling stone gathers no moss._

Peleijaõ os ladrones, descobrem-se os furtos. _When thieves fall out,
their knaveries come to light._

Peleijaõ os touros, mal pelos ramos. _When bulls fight, woe to the
frogs._

Pelos Santos novos esquecem os velhos. _The old saints are forgotten in
the new._

Penhor que come, ninguem o tome. _Beware of a pledge that eats._

Pequenas rachas accendem o fogo, e os madeiros grossos o sustentaõ.
_Little chips kindle the fire, and big logs sustain it._

Pequeno machado parte grande carvalho. _A small hatchet fells a great
oak._

Perdendo tempo, naõ se ganha dinheiro. _Money is not gained by losing
time._

Perro ladrador, nunca bom caçador. _A barking dog was never a good
hunter._

Pés costumados a andar, naõ pódem quedos estar. _Feet accustomed to go
cannot be still._

Pobreza nunca em amores fez bom feito. _Poverty never sped well in
love._

Porcos com frio, e homens com vinho, fazem grande ruido. _Pigs in the
cold and men in drink make a great noise._

Por falta de homens fizeraõ a meu pai juiz. _For lack of men they made
my father a justice._

Porfia mata a caça. _Perseverance kills the game._

Pouco damno espanta, e muito amansa. _A little injury dismays, and a
great one stills._

Pouco fel damna muito mel. _A little gall spoils much honey._

Preguiça, chave de pobreza. _Sloth is the key of poverty._

Primeiro que cases, vé o que fazes. _Before you marry consider what you
do._

Principio querem as cousas. _Everything must have a beginning._

Prometter naõ he dar, mas a nescios contentar. _Promising is not
giving, but serves to content fools._


Q.

Qual mais, qual menos, toda a lã he pelos. _All the wool is hair, more
or less._

Qual o pai, tal o filho. _Like father, like son._

Qual o Rei, tal a lei; qual a lei, tal a grei. _Like king, like law;
like law, like people._

Quando em casa naõ está o gato, estende-se o rato. _When the cat’s away
the mice will play._

Quem pouco sabe, asinha o reza. _He who knows little soon blabs it._

Quem quando póde naõ quer, quando quer naõ póde. _Who will not when he
can, can’t when he will._

Quem quer pescar, ha-se-de molhar. _He who would catch fish must not
mind wetting himself._

Quem quizer olho saõ, ate a maõ. _He that would keep his eye sound must
tie up his hand._

Quem quizer ser muito tempo velho, comece-o a ser cedo. _He that would
be old long must begin betimes._

Quem se cala, e pedras apanha, tempo vem que as derrama. _Who holds his
peace and gathers stones, will find a time to throw them._

Quem só come seu gallo, só sella seu cavallo. _Who eats his fowl alone,
must saddle his horse alone._

Quem te faz festa, naõ soendo fazer, ou te quer enganar, ou te há
mister. _He who makes more of you than he is wont, either means to
cheat you or wants you._

Quem tem boca, naõ diga ao outro, assopra. _Let not him that has a
mouth ask another to blow._

Quem tem bom ninho, tem bom amigo. _He who has a good nest, finds good
friends._

Quem tem quatro, e gasta cinco, naõ há mister bolsa, nem bolsinho. _He
who has four and spends five, has no need of a purse._

Quem tem telhado de vidro, naõ atire pedras ao do vizinho. _He who has
a glass roof must not throw stones at his neighbour’s._

Quem tudo lo quier, tudo lo pierde. _All covet, all lose._

Que queira, que naõ queira, o asno ha de ir á feira. _Will he nill he,
the ass must go to the fair._

Queres conhecer tua filha, olha-lhe a companhia. _Would you know your
daughter? See her in company._

Queres que te siga o caõ, da-lhe paõ. _If you would have the dog follow
you, give him bread._

Quereis que vos sirva, bom Rey, dai-me, de que viva. _Would you have me
serve you, good king, give me the means of living._


R.

Raposa dormida, naõ lhe cahe nada da boca. _Nothing falls into the
mouth of a sleeping fox._

Rato, que naõ sabe mais que hum buraco, asinha he tomado. _The rat that
knows but one hole is soon caught._

Roga ao santo, até passar o barranco. _Pray to the saint until you have
passed the slough._

Rogos de Rei mandados saõ. _King’s entreaties are commands._

Roim seja, quem por roim se tem. _Vile let him be who deems himself
vile._


S.

Sal vertido, nunca bem colhido. _Spilt salt is never well collected._

Sangrai-o, purgai-o, e se morrer, enterrai-o. _Bleed him, purge him,
and if he dies, bury him._

Sempre o alheio suspira por seu dono. _What is another’s always sighs
for its master._

Senta-te no teu lugar, naõ te faraó levantar. _Seat yourself in your
place, and they will not make you rise._

Se queres a agoa limpa, tira-a da fonte viva. _If you want clear water,
draw it from the spring._

Se queres saber quanto val hum cruzado, busca-o emprestado. _If you
would know what a dollar is worth, try to borrow it._

Se queres ser bem servido, serve a ti mesmo. _If you want to be served,
serve yourself._

Se queres ser bom juiz, ouve o que cada hum diz. _If you would be a
good judge, hear what every one says._

Se queres ser pobre sem o sentir, mette obreiro, deita-te a dormir. _If
you would grow poor without perceiving it, employ workmen and go to
sleep._

Se queres ter boa fama, naõ te tome o sol na cama. _If you would be in
good repute, let not the sun find you in bed._

Se queres viver saõ, faze-te velho ante tempo. _If you would be
healthy, be sage betimes._

Serve a senhor, saberàs que he dor. _Serve a lord, and you will know
what it is to be vexed._

Se te dà o pobre, he para que mais te tome. _If a poor man gives to
you, he expects more in return._

Se te fizeres mel, comer-te-haõ as moscas. _Make yourself honey, and
the flies will eat you._

Se tens physico teu amigo, manda-o a casa de teu inimigo. _If you have
a friend who is a physician, send him to your enemy’s house._


T.

Tambem os ameaçados comem paõ. _Threatened folks eat bread._

Tanta culpa tem o ladraõ como o consentidor. _The accomplice is as bad
as the thief._

Tanto morre o Papa, como o que naõ tem capa. _Death spares neither Pope
nor beggar._

Tantos morrem dos cordeiros, como dos carneiros. _There die as many
lambs as wethers._

Tanto val a cousa, quanto daõ por ella. _The worth of a thing is what
it will bring._

Taõ bom he Pedro como seu amo. _Jack is as good as his master._

Tarde dar, e negar, estaõ a par. _To be slow in giving and to refuse,
are alike._

Tempo, e hora naõ se ata com soga. _Time and the hour are not to be
tied with a rope._

Tres irmaõs, tres fortalezas. _Three brothers, three fortresses._


V.

Vai-se o tempo, como o vento. _Time passes like the wind._

Vender gato por lebre. _To sell a cat for a hare._

Vender mel ao colmeeiro. _To sell honey to one who keeps hives._

Vento, e ventura, pouco dura. _Wind and fortune are not lasting._

Ventura te dé Deos, filho, que saber pouco te basta. _God give you
luck, my son, for little wit must serve your turn._

Vi hum homem, que vio outro homem, que vio o mar. _I saw a man, who saw
another man, who saw the sea._




DUTCH PROVERBS.


A.

Aan den verstandigen is een woord genoeg. _A word is enough to the
wise._

Aan een krank touw zal men zachkens trekken. _Pull gently at a weak
rope._

Aangeboden dienst is onwaard. _Proffered service is little valued._
(_Proffered service stinks._)

Aanhoude doet verkrigen. _Perseverance brings success._

Aan het werk kent men den werkman. _The workman is known by his work._

Aan velen belast wordt minst gedaan. _Little is done where many
command._

Achter iederen berg ligt weer een dal. _Behind every mountain lies a
vale._

Al eer dat gij een vriend betrouwt, zoo eet met hem een mudde zout.
_Before you make a friend, eat a peck of salt with him._

Alle ampten zijn smeerig. _All offices are greasy_ (i. e. _open to
receive what the Dutch call smear-money, a term derived from the fee
paid for greasing wheels_).

Alle baat helpt. _Every little helps._

Alle beetjes helpen en alle vrachtjes ligten, zei de schipper en
hij smeet zijne vrouw overboord. _Every little helps to lighten the
freight, said the captain, as he threw his wife overboard._

Alle beginselen zijn zwaar, zei de dief, en voor de eerste maal stal
hij een aanbeeld. _All beginnings are hard, said the thief, and began
by stealing an anvil._

Alle dagen een draadje is een hemdsmouw in het jaar. _Every day a
thread makes a skein in the year._

Alle dagen kan men dragen uitgezondert goede dagen. _Men can bear all
things except good days._

Alle dingen hebben een einde behalve God. _Everything has an end
excepting God._

Alle dingen hebben twee handvatsels. _Everything has two handles (or
two sides)._

Alle ding heeft een waarom. _Everything has a wherefore._

Alle ding is wel: heeft de bruel geen geel haer, zij heeft een geel
vel. _All is well: for if the bride has not fair hair, she has a fair
skin._

Alle hanen moeten een kam hebben. _All cocks must have a comb._

Allemans vriend, is allemans gek. _Every man’s friend, is every man’s
fool._

Allengskens gaat men ook verre. _Step by step one goes far._

Alle vloed heeft zijne ebbe. _Every flood has its ebb._

Alle waarom heeft zijn daarom. _Every why has its wherefore._

Alle wolken regenen niet. _All clouds do not rain._

Als alle de waerelt ziet dat gij een verken zijt, eu moet gij niet in
’t schot? _When every one sees that you are a pig, why don’t you go
into the sty?_

Als apen hoog willen klimmen, ziet men hun naakte billen. _When apes
climb high, they show their naked rumps._

Als de armoede de deur binnenkomt, vliegt de liefde het venster uit.
_Where poverty comes in at the door, love flies out at the window._

Als de buik zat is, is ’t harte vrolijk. _When the stomach is full the
heart is glad._

Als de ezel te wel is, soo gaat hij op ’t  s danssen. _When the ass is
too happy he begins dancing on the ice._

Als de herder doolt, doolen de schapen. _When the shepherd strays, the
sheep stray._

Als de hond onder ligt, al de wereld wil hem bijten. _When the dog is
down, every one is ready to bite him._

Als de kat slaapt, spelen de muizen. _When the cat sleeps, the mice
play._

Als de katten muizen, miaauwen ze niet. _When cats are mousing they
don’t mew._

Als de kat van huis is, dan hebben de muizen bruis. _When the cat’s
away, it is jubilee with the mice._

Als de kok met den bottelier kijft, dan hoort men waar de boter blijft.
_When the cook and the steward fall out we hear who stole the butter._

Als de man wel wint de vrouw wel spint. _When the husband earns well
the wife spins well._

Als de muggen in January danssen, wordt de boer een bedelaar. _When
gnats swarm in January, the peasant becomes a beggar._

Als de muggen in Maart danssen, dat doet het schaap den dood aan. _When
flies swarm in March, sheep come to their death._

Als de muis zat is, zo wordt het meel bitter. _When the mouse has had
its fill, the meal turns bitter._

Als de wijn ingaat, gaat de wijsheid uit. _When the wine goes in the
wit goes out._

Als de wolf oud wordt regen hem de kraaijen. _When the wolf grows old
the crows ride him._

Als de zak vol is, reegt hij zijn oren. _When the sack is full it
pricks up its ears._

Als de zotten ter markt kommen, so krijgen de kramers geld. _When fools
go to market, pedlars make money._

Als een muis in de meelzak gevallen is, meent zij dat zij de molenaar
zelf is. _When a mouse has fallen into a meal sack, he thinks he is the
miller himself._

Als een oude hond blaft, zo ziet uit. _When an old dog barks, look
out._ (_When the old dog barks, he giveth counsel._)

Als één schaap over den dam is, volgen de anderen. _When one sheep is
over the dam, the rest follow._

Als elk voor zijn huis veegt, zoo worden alle straten schoon. _Were
every one to sweep before his own house, every street would be clean._

Als God een land plagen wil, dan beneemt hij den heeren hunne wijsheid.
_When God means to punish a nation, He deprives its rulers of wisdom._

Als God een mensch plagen wil, dan bijt hem wel een muis dood. _When it
is God’s will to plague a man, a mouse can bite him to death._

Als God niet wil, dan kan de heilige niet. _When God will, the saint
cannot._

Als had komt, zo is hebben te laat. _When had comes, have is too late._

Als het God belieft, zoo regent het met alle winden. _When God pleases,
it rains with every wind._

Als hij lang genoeg wacht, wordt de wereld zijn eigendom. _If he waits
long enough the world will be his own._

Als men hem den vinger geeft, neemt hij de geheele hand. _Give him your
finger and he will seize your hand._ (_Give him an inch and he’ll take
an ell._)

Als men van den duivel spreekt, dan rammelt reeds zijn gebeente. _Talk
of the devil and you hear his bones rattle._

Als men van den wolf spreekt, ziet men weldra zijn staart. _Talk of the
wolf and his tail appears._

Als niet komt tot iet, zo kent het zich zelf niet. _When nought comes
to aught, it does not know itself._

Als ’t geluk u tegen lacht, sta dan op de wacht. _When prosperity
smiles, beware of its guiles._

Als ’t hoofd ziek is, is al ziek. _When the head is sick the whole body
is sick._

Als ’t varken zat is, zoo stoot het de trog om. _When the pig has had a
bellyful it upsets the trough._

Als ’t wel gaat zo is het goet raden. _When things go well it is easy
to advise._

Als twee honden vechten om een been, loopt de derde er meê heen. _When
two dogs fight for a bone, the third runs away with it._

Als u vijand gaat te rug, maakt hem vrij een gulden brug. _When thine
enemy retreateth, make him a golden bridge._ (_For a flying enemy make
a silver bridge._)

Als uws buurmans huis brandt, is ’t tijd uit te zien. _When thy
neighbour’s house is on fire it’s time to look about thee._

Al te goed is buurmans (_of_ allemans) gek. _All too good is every
man’s fool._ (_He that makes himself a sheep will be eaten by the
wolf._)

Arbeid verwarmt, luiheid verarmt. _Labour warms, sloth harms._

Arenden brengen geene duiven voort. _Eagles don’t breed doves._

Arenden vangen geene vliegen. _Eagles catch no fleas._

Arme lui wijsheid gaat meest verloren. _Poor folk’s wisdom goes for
little._

Armoede is luiheids loon. _Poverty is the reward of idleness._


B.

Bedelaars erf ligt in alle landen. _A beggar’s estate lies in all
lands._

Belofte maakt schuld, en schuld maakt belofte. _Promises make debts,
and debts make promises._

Beloven en houden zijn twee dingen. _Promising and performing are two
things._

Beloven is een, en woord houden is twee. _Promising is one thing,
performing another._

Bemin wel and’ren, maar u zelven boven al; zijt aan den goeden goed,
doch mijd uw ongeval. _Love others well, but love thyself the most;
give good for good, but not to thine own cost._

Beter alleen dan kwalijk verzelt. _Better alone than in bad company._

Beter arm met eere, dan rijk met schande. _Better poor with honour than
rich with shame._

Beter arm te land, dan rijk op zee. _Better poor on land than rich at
sea._

Beter bedorven dan verloren land. _Better a ruined than a lost land._

Beter benijd dan beklaagt. _Better be envied than pitied._

Beter buik geborsten, dan goede spijs verloren. _Better belly burst
than good victuals spoil._

Beter de hand als den hals uit te strekken. _Better stretch your hand
than your neck._ (_Better beg than steal._)

Beter door een’ ezel gedragen, dan door een paard in ’t zand geslagen.
_Better be carried by an ass than thrown by a horse._

Beter een been gebroken dan de hals. _Better a leg broken than the
neck._

Beter een blind paard, dan een leege halter. _Better a blind horse than
an empty halter._

Beter een die ’t heeft gezien, dan van hooren zeggen tien. _Better one
eye-witness than ten hearsay witnesses._

Beter eene vogel in de hand dan tien in de lucht. _Better a bird in the
hand than ten in the air._

Beter een half ei dan een ledige dop. _Better half an egg than an empty
shell._

Beter een hond te vriend dan te vijand. _Better have a dog for your
friend than your enemy._ (_Better a dog fawn on you than bite you._)

Beter een jaar op een goed paard gereden, dan zijn gansche leven op
een’ ezel. _Better ride a good horse for a year, than an ass all your
life._

Beter eens in den hemel dan tienmaal aan de deur. _Better once in
heaven than ten times at the gate._

Beter in de vogelen sang dan in ’t ijzeren klang. _Better where birds
sing than where irons ring._

Beter in de vogelgang, dan in der heeren klang. _Better afield with the
birds than hanging on lords._

Beter laat dan nooit. _Better late than never._

Beter met een ouden wagen in de heide dan met een nieuw schip op zee.
_Better on the heath with an old cart than at sea in a new ship._

Beter nog een anker kwijt dan het geheele schip. _Better lose the
anchor than the whole ship._

Beter scheel dan blind. _Better squinting than blind._

Beter ten halve gekeerd dan ten heele gedwaald. _Better return half way
than lose yourself._

Beter vrede houden dan vrede maken. _Better keep peace than make peace._

Bij alle feesten dient een zotje. _There is a fool at every feast._

Bij de vromen wordt men vroom. _With the good we become good._

Bij de wal langs vaart men zekerst. _It is safest sailing within reach
of the shore._

Bij nacht zijn alle katten graauw. _By night all cats are grey._

Bijt mij niet, ik heet beetje; had ik een staartje zoo was ik een
leeuwtje. _Bite me not, my name is little grizzle; had I a little tail
I should be a little lion._

Blaffende honden bijten niet. _Barking dogs don’t bite._

Blijven doet beklijven. _Biding makes thriving._

Bloemen zijn geen vruchten. _Blossoms are not fruits._

Boomen die men veel verplant gedijen zelden. _Trees often transplanted
seldom prosper._

Booze reden bederven goede zeden. _Evil words corrupt good manners._

Borgen maakt zorgen. _Borrowing brings care._ (_He that goes a
borrowing goes a sorrowing._)

Brood bij de ligt, kaas bij de wigt. _Eat bread that’s light, and
cheese by weight._


C.

Centen-wijsheid en daalder domheid. _Cent-wisdom and dollar-folly._
(_Penny wise and pound foolish._)


D.

Daar behoort meer ten dans dan een paar dans schoenen. _More belongs to
dancing than a pair of dancing-shoes._

Daar gaan veel woorden in een zak. _Many words go to a sackful._ (_Many
words will not fill a bushel._)

Daar komen zo wel kalver huiden als ossen huiden te markt. _There come
as many calf-skins to market as ox-skins._

Daar men ’t minst verwacht, springt de haas uit de gracht. _When we
least expect it, the hare darts out of the ditch._

Daar niets goeds in is, gaat niets goeds uit. _Where there’s no good
within, no good comes out._

Daar speelt de duivel mee, zei Saam, vier azen en niet eéne troef. _The
devil’s in the cards, said Sam, four aces and not a single trump._

Daar ’t een mensch wee doet, daar heeft hij de hand. _Where a man feels
pain he lays his hand._

Daar twee kijven hebben ze beiden schuld. _When two quarrel both are in
the wrong._

Daar vloog nooit vogel zoo hoog, of hij moet zijn kost op de aarde
zoeken. _Bird never flew so high but it had to come to the ground for
food._

Daar was nooit kap zoo heilig of de duivel krijgt er zijn hoofd wel in.
_Never was hood so holy but the devil could get his head into it._

Daar zijn meer dieven als er opgehangen worden. _There are more thieves
than are hanged._

Dat biertje hebt gij zelf gebrouwd, en moet het ook uit drinken. _That
beer’s of your own brewing, and you must drink it._

Dat gij wilt alleen weten, zeg het niemand. _Tell no one what you would
have known only to yourself._

Dat is bedelaars kost, zei de vrouw en zij bakte eijeren met metworst.
_That is beggar’s fare, said the dame, when she fried eggs with the
sausages._

Dat is een man als een boek. _He is a man as a book._

Dat is goed en wel, maar geld is beter. _That’s all well and good, but
gold is better._

Dat is hem noodig, als eenen bedelaar het goudgewigt. _’Tis as
necessary to him as gold weights are to a beggar._

Dat is het ambacht van dikken Michiel: drinken, eten, en wandelen. _The
trade of thick-headed Michael: eating, drinking, and idling._

Dat muisje zal een staart hebben. _That mouse will have a tail_ (i. e.
_The thing will have a long train of consequences_).

Dat te zwaar is, laat liggen. _Let lie what is too heavy to lift._

De adel der ziel is meer waardig dan de adel des geslachts. _Nobility
of soul is more honourable than nobility of birth._

De afwezigen krijgen altijd de schuld. _The absent always bear the
blame._

De armoede is de moeder van alle kunsten. _Necessity is the mother of
invention._

De beste mesting is des heerens oog. _The best fodder is the master’s
eye._

De beste mest op den akker is des meesters oog en voet. _The master’s
eye and foot are the best manure for the field._

De beste stuur-lieden zijn aan land. _The best pilots are ashore._

De beste zaak heeft nog een goed’ advocaat noodig. _The best cause
requires a good pleader._

De boer zit op een’ cent als de duivel op eene ziel. _The boor looks
after a cent as the devil after a soul._

De boog kan niet altijd gespannen zijn. _The bow must not be always
bent._

De boom valt ten eersten slage niet. _The tree does not fall at the
first stroke._

De bosschen hebben ooren, en de velden oogen. _Woods have ears and
fields have eyes._

De derde man brengt de vreugd aan. _The third person makes good
company._

De dertiende man brengt den dood an. _The thirteenth man brings death._

De deugd beloont zich zelve. _Virtue is its own reward._

De dood kent geen’ almanak. _Death keeps no almanack._

De druiven zijn zuur, sprak de vos, maar hij kon er niet bij. _The
grapes are sour, said the fox, when he could not get at them._

De duivel heeft mede onder de menschen zijne marteren. _The devil has
his martyrs among men._

De duivel is zoo zwart niet, als hij wel geschilderd wordt. _The devil
is not so black as he is painted._

De duivel zit achter het kruis. _The devil sits behind the cross._

De dwaasheid heeft arends vleugelen, maar uils oogen. _Folly hath
eagle’s wings, but the eyes of an owl._

De een doet het uit liefde, de ander om eere, de derde om geld. _One
does it for love, another for honour, a third for money._

De eene dienst is den anderen waard. _One good turn deserves another._

De eene hand wascht de andere, en beide het aangezigt. _One hand washes
the other, and both the face._

De eene kraai bijt den andere geen oogen uit. _One crow does not peck
out another’s eyes._

De eene spijker drijft de andere in. _One nail drives in another._

De een slaat op de haag terwijl de ander vogels vangt. _One beats the
bush and the other catches the bird._

De eerambten veranderen de zeden. _Honours change manners._

De exter kan haar huppelen niet laten. _The magpie cannot leave her
hopping._

De ezel en de drijver denken niet eveneens. _The ass and the driver
never think alike._

De ezels dragen de haver, en de paarden eten die. _Asses carry the oats
and horses eat them._

De gans blaast wel, maar bijt niet. _The goose hisses, but does not
bite._

De gebraden ganzen kommen u niet in den mond vliegen. _Roast geese
don’t come flying into your mouth._

De gedaante nabootsen van eenen pot met twee ooren. _The counterfeit
image of a pot with two ears._

De geleerdsten zijn de wijsten niet. _The most learned are not the
wisest._

De gelegenheid maakt den dief. _Opportunity makes the thief._

De gekken vragen naar de klok, maar de wijzen weten hunnen tijd. _Fools
ask what’s o’clock, but wise men know their time._

De gewoonte is eene tweede natuur. _Custom is second nature._

De goede betaler is meester van eens anders beurs. _He who pays well is
master of another’s purse._

De hennen leggen gaarne waar zij een ei zien. _Hens like to lay where
they see an egg._

De honig is zoet, maar de bije steekt. _Honey is sweet, but the bee
stings._

De jonge dwazen meenen dat d’oude razen, maar d’oude hebben meer
vergeeten als de jonge dwazen weten. _Young fools think that the old
are dotards, but the old have forgotten more than the young fools know._

De jonge raven zijn als de oude gebeit. _The young ravens are beaked
like the old._

De kaars die voor gaat die licht best. _The candle that goes before
gives the best light._

De kap maakt de monnik niet. _It is not the cowl that makes the friar._

De keel kost veel. _The maw costs much._

De kleederen maken den man. _Clothes make the man._

De kleine dieven hangt men, de groote laat men loopen. _We hang little
thieves, and let great ones escape._

De koe weet niet waar haar de staart toe dient, voor dat zij die kwijt
is. _The cow does not know the value of her tail till she has lost it._

De kruik gaat zo lang te water dat zij eindelyk breekt. _The pitcher
goes so long to the well that it breaks at last._

Dek toe den pot, daar is aal in. _Cover up the pot, there’s an eel in
it._

De kwade schuwt het licht, gelijk de duivel het kruis. _The wicked shun
the light as the devil does the cross._

De liefde begint eerst met zich zelven. _Charity begins at home._

De mensch wikt, maar God beschikt. _Man proposes, God disposes._

De monnik preekte dat men niet stelen mogt, en hij zelf had de gans in
zijne schapperade. _The monk preached against stealing, and had the
goose in his larder._ (_The friar preached against stealing, and had a
pudding in his sleeve._)

De morgenstond heeft goud in den mond. _The morning hour has gold in
its mouth._

De mug vliegt zoo lang om de kaars, tot dat zij zich brandt. _The fly
flutters about the candle till at last it gets burnt._

De muuren hebben ooren. _Walls have ears._

Den behoeftige is de schaamte onnut. _Bashfulness is of no use to the
needy._

De nood doet een oud wijf draven. _Need maketh the old wife trot._

Den rook ontvlugtende valt hij in ’t vuur. _Escaping from the smoke he
falls into the fire._

Den slapende wolven loopt geen schaap in den mond. _No sheep runs into
the mouth of a sleeping wolf._

De olie is best in het begin en de honig op het einde, maar in het
midden dient de wijn. _Oil is best at the beginning, honey at the end,
and wine in the middle._

De oogen zijn groter dan de buik. _The eyes are bigger than the belly._

De open deur roept den dief. _The open door invites the thief._

De paarden achter den wagen spannen. _To harness the horses behind the
cart._ (_To put the cart before the horse._)

De pot verwijt den ketel, dat hij zwart is. _The pot upbraids the
kettle that it is black._

Der bedelaren hand is eene bodemlooze mand. _A beggar’s hand is a
bottomless basket._

De rijken vreten de armen en de duivel vreet de rijken, zoo worden
allen gevreten. _The rich devour the poor, and the devil devours the
rich, and so both are devoured._

De rozen vallen af, maar de doornen blijven over. _Roses fall, but the
thorns remain._

De schoone veêren maaken den schoonen vogel. _Fine feathers make fine
birds._

De sikkel in eens anders koorn slaan. _To hang your sickle on another
man’s corn._

De stille zeug eet al den draf op. _A still sow eats up all the draff._

De splinten in eens anders oog zien en de balk in zijn eigen niet. _To
peer out the mote in another’s eye and not the beam in your own._

De tijd brengt rozen. _Time brings roses._

De tijd die voorbij is en komt niet weer. _Time past never returns._

De tijd gaat, de dood komt. _Time goes, death comes._

De tijd is aan God en ons. _Time is God’s and ours._

De tijd wischt alles uit. _Time destroys all things._

Deugd bestaat in de daad. _Virtue consists in action._

De uitkomst zal het leeren. _The proof of the pudding is in the eating._

De vogel is geern daar hij gebroed is. _Where the bird was hatched it
haunts._

De vorsch huppelt weder in de poel, zat hij ook al op een gulden stoel.
_The frog will jump back into the pool, although it sits on a golden
stool._

De vrucht valt niet ver van den stam. _The fruit falls not far from the
stem._

De waarheid is eene dochter van den tijd. _Truth is the daughter of
time._

De wereld is een schouwtooneel; elk speelt zijn rol en krijgt zijn
deel. _The world’s a stage; each plays his part, and takes his share._
(The earliest collection in which we find this Shakspearean proverb is
_Winschooten’s Seeman_, Leyden, 1681.)

De wereld wil bedrogen zijn. _The world likes to be cheated._

De woorden zijn goed, zei de wolf, maar ik kom in ’t dorp niet. _The
words are fair, said the wolf, but I will not come into the village._

De zee en de visschen verzwelgen. _To swallow both sea and fish._

De zee met sponsen opdroogen. _To wipe up the sea with a sponge._

De ziekten komen te paard, en gaan te voet weêr heen. _Sickness comes
on horseback and departs on foot._

De zotten maken de feesten en de wijzen hebben de geneugten. _Fools
make feasts and wise men eat them._

Die aan den weg timmert, heeft veel berechts. _He that buildeth upon
the highway hath many advisers._

Die aan God geen woord houd, houd geen woord aan menschen. _Who don’t
keep faith with God won’t keep it with man._

Die bij kreupelen woont, leert hinken. _He that lives with cripples
learns to limp._

Die de honig wil uithalen moet het steken der bijen ondergaan. _He who
would gather honey must brave the sting of bees._

Die de duivel op zijn hals haalt, moet hem werk geven. _He that has the
devil on his neck must find him work._

Die de gemeente dient, dient eenen kwaden heer. _Who serves the public
serves a fickle master._

Die de kern wil hebben moet de dop kraken. _He that would have the
kernel must crack the shell._

Die de schande niet ontziet, komt niet tot eer. _Who fears no shame
comes to no honour._

Die de spraak kent, komt overal te regt. _Who knows the tongues is at
home everywhere._

Die de wereld wel beziet, men zag nooit schoonder niet. _He that well
considers the world, must own he has never seen a better._

Die een ander jaagt zit zelfs niet stil. _He that chases another does
not sit still himself._

Die een boer bedriegen wil, moet een’ boer medebrengen. _He who would
cheat a peasant must take one with him._

Die een goude poorte wil maken, breng er elken dag een nagel. _He that
would make a golden gate, must bring a nail to it daily._

Die een hond smijten wel vind ras een knuppel. _Who wants to beat a
dog, soon finds a stick._

Die een hoofd van boter heeft moet bij geen’ oven komen. _He that hath
a head of butter must not come near the oven._

Die een kwaad wijf heeft, diens hel begint op d’aarde. _Who has a bad
wife, his hell begins on earth._

Die eens steelt is altijd een dief. _Once a thief always a thief._

Die eerst komt, die eerst maalt. _Who comes first, grinds first._

Die eieren hebben wil, moet der hennen kakelen lijden. _He that will
have eggs, must bear with cackling._

Die geboren is om te hangen, behoeft geen vrees te hebben van
verdrinken. _He that’s born to be hanged will never be drowned._

Die goede dagen moede is, die neme een wijf. _Whoso is tired of happy
days, let him take a wife._

Die heden was een ridder, word morgen wel een bidder. _Who to-day was a
haughty knight, is to-morrow a pennyless wight._

Die heden wat spaart, morgen wat heeft. _He that spares something
to-day will have something to-morrow._

Die hem zelf kittelt, lacht als hij wil. _He that tickles himself, may
laugh when he will._

Die het geluk heeft leidt de bruid ter kerk. _He that has the luck
leads the bride to church._

Die het in het vuur verloren heeft, moet het in de asch zoeken. _What
is lost in the fire must be sought in the ashes._

Die iets vindt eer ’t verloren is, sterft eer hij ziek is. _He that
finds something before it is lost, will die before he is sick._

Die in een kwaad gerucht komt, is half gehangen. _He that hath an ill
name is half hanged._

Die jaagt met katten, en vangt maar ratten. _Whoso hunteth with cats
will catch nothing but rats._

Die jocken wils, moet jocken verstaan, ’t is anders beter ongedaan. _He
that would jest must take a jest, else to let it alone were best._

Die kaatsen wil, moet den bal verwachten. _He that plays at racket must
watch the ball._

Die kan lijden en verdragen, vind zijn vijand voor zijn voeten
geslagen. _He that can be patient finds his foe at his feet._

Die keur heeft, heeft angst. _He that has a choice has trouble._

Die komt ongeroepen gaat weg ongedankt. _He that comes unbidden goes
unthanked._

Die kruipt en valt niet. _He that creepeth falleth not._

Die laag blijft kan niet hard vallen. _He that abideth low cannot fall
hard._

Die maar een oog heeft bewaar dat wel. _Who has but one eye must take
good care of it._

Die met den duivel ingescheept is, moet met hem overvaren. _He that is
embarked with the devil must sail with him._

Die met gouden wapens vecht, heeft altijd het beste regt. _They who
fight with golden weapons are pretty sure to prove their right._

Die met honden te bed gaat, staat met vlooijen weder op. _He who goes
to bed with dogs will get up with fleas._

Die met wolven omgaan wil, moet mede huilen. _He that lives with
wolves, must howl with wolves._

Die mij geeft, die leert mij geeven. _Who gives to me, teaches me to
give._

Die mild is, geeft zich rijk; de gierigaard neemt zich arm. _The
generous man enriches himself by giving; the miser hoards himself poor._

Die niet oppast ziet zijn geld niet wassen. _Who watches not catches
not._

Die niet te raden is, is niet te helpen. _He that will not be
counselled cannot be helped._

Die op borg geeft, verliest zijn goed en zijn vriend. _Who ventures to
lend, loses money and friend._

Die op de zee is heeft de wind niet in zijn handen. _He that is at sea
has not the wind in his hands._

Diepe zwemmers, hooge klimmers ziet men zelden op bed sterven. _Deep
swimmers and high climbers seldom die in their beds._

Die schuld ontkent, schuld bekent. _Who excuses, accuses._

Die te goed is, wordt van de boozen verongelijkt. _Who is righteous
overmuch is a morsel for the Old One._

Die te veel onderneemt, slaagt zelden. _Who undertakes too much,
succeeds but little._

Die ’t klein versmaad is ’t groot niet waard. _He that despises the
little is not worthy of the great._

Die van den hond gebeten is, moet van hetzelfde haar daaropleggen. _He
that is bitten by a dog must apply some of its hair._

Die van verre komt heeft goed liegen. _They who come from afar have
leave to lie._

Die veel dienstboden heeft, die heeft veel dieven. _Who has many
servants has many thieves._

Die veel dingen te gelijk doet, doet er zelden een goed. _Who
undertakes many things at once seldom does anything well._

Die veel hoort, hoort veel liegen. _He that hears much, hears many
lies._

Die verkoopt hoeft maar een oog, die koopt hoeft er hondert. _Who buys
wants a hundred eyes, who sells need have but one._

Die voor de bladeren bang is, moet niet in het bosch gaan. _He who is
afraid of leaves must not go into the wood._

Die voor een ander borg blijft, betaalt voor hem. _He who is surety for
another, pays for him._

Die vuur begeert, die zoek ’t in de assche. _Who wants fire, let him
look for it in the ashes._

Die vuur wil hebben moet de rook lijden. _He that will have fire must
bear with smoke._

Die wel bemind kastijdt zijn kind. _He that loves his child chastises
him._

Die wil wandlen achter land, neme vrij zijn beurs ter hand. _He who
would travel through the land, must go with open purse in hand._

Die zich zelven honig maakt wordt van de bijen opgegeten. _He who makes
himself honey will be eaten by the bees._

Die zijn gat brand, moet op de blaêren zitten. _He who burns his
posteriors must sit on blisters._

Die zonder den waard reekent, reekent kwaalijk. _Who reckons without
his host must reckon again._

Die zwijgt bewilligt. _Silence gives consent._

Distels en doornen steken zeer, maar kwade tongen nog veel meer.
_Thistles and thorns prick sore, but evil tongues prick more._

Dochters moeten wel gezien maar niet gehoord worden. _Daughters may be
seen but not heard._

Dochters zijn broze waren. _Daughters are brittle ware._

Doe raad voor ’t kwaad, eer ’t verder gaat. _Take counsel before it
goes ill, lest it go worse._

Domines komen om je wijn, en officiers om je dochters. _Dominies come
for your wine, and officers for your daughters._

Doode honden bijten niet. _Dead dogs don’t bite._

Door wind en stroom is goed stuuren. _It’s good steering with wind and
tide._

Dreigers vechten niet. _All threateners don’t fight._

Drie vrouwen en eene gans maken eene markt. _Three women and a goose
make a market._

Dwalen is menschelijk. _To err is human._

Dwazen zijn vrij in alle landen. _Fools are free all the world over._


E.

Een aap blijft een aap, al draagt hij een gouden ring. _An ape’s an
ape, though he wear a gold ring._

Een aap, een paap, en eene weegluis, zijn drie duivels in één huis. _An
ape, a priest, and a louse, are three devils in one house._

Een arbeider is zijn’ loon waardig. _The workman is worthy of his hire._

Een bedreigd man leeft zeven jaren. _A threatened man lives seven
years._

Een blind man schiet somtijds wel een kraai. _A blind man may sometimes
shoot a crow._

Een dagelijksche gast is een groote dief in de keuken. _A daily guest
is a great thief in the kitchen._

Een dag verleent, wat een geheel jaar weigert. _A single day grants
what a whole year denies._

Een diamant van eene dochter wordt een glas van eene vrouw. _A
brilliant daughter makes a brittle wife._

Een die een zot trouwt om zijn kot, verliest het kot en houdt den zot.
_Who weds a sot to get his cot, will lose the cot and keep the sot._

Een dief maakt gelegenheid. _A thief makes opportunity._

Een dwaas en zijn geld zijn haast gescheiden. _A fool and his money are
soon parted._

Een dwaas maakt er veel. _One fool makes many._

Eene barmhartige moeder maakt eene schurftige dochter. _An indulgent
mother makes a sluttish daughter._

Eene bedroefde bruid maakt eene blijde vrouw. _A sad bride makes a glad
wife._

Een eerlijk man’s woord is zijn zegel. _An honest man’s word is his
bond._

Een ei is een ei zei de boer, en hij greep naar het ganzenei. _An egg
is an egg, said the boor, and took the goose’s egg._

Een eij geeven om een’ os te bekomen. _To give an egg to get an ox._

Een eij scheeren. _To shave an egg._

Een enkele bontekraai maakt geen winter. _One crow does not make a
winter._

Eene talie te kort is zooveel als eene el. _An inch too short is as bad
as an ell._

Een ezel stoot zich geen tweemaal aan een’ steen. _An ass does not hit
himself twice against the same stone._

Eene zwaluw maakt geen zomer. _One swallow does not make a summer._

Eene zwarte hen legt witte eijeren. _Black hens lay white eggs._

Een gast, gelijk de visch, stinkt den derden dag. _A guest, like a
fish, stinks the third day._

Een gebrand kind vreest het vuur. _A burnt child dreads the fire._

Een geëdelde boer kent zijn vader niet. _An ennobled peasant does not
know his own father._

Een gegeeven paard moet men niet in den bek zien. _Look not a gift
horse in the mouth._

Een gehuurd paard en eigene sporen maken korte mijlen. _A hired horse
and one’s own spurs make short miles._

Een gek spreekt wel eens wijs woord. _A fool may chance to say a wise
thing._

Een God, ééne vrouw, maar veel vrienden. _One God, one wife, but many
friends._

Een goed begin is half voltooid. _Well begun is half done._

Een goede naam is beter dan olij. _A good name is better than oil_ (i.
e. _riches_).

Een goed paard is zijn voeder waard. _A good horse is worth his
fodder._

Een goed vriend is beter dan zilver en goud. _A good friend is better
than silver and gold._

Een groot boek, een groot kwaad. _A great book is a great evil._

Een haan is stout op zijn eigen erf. _A cock is valiant on his own
dunghill._

Een half woord is bij hem genoeg. _Half a word to the wise is enough._

Een hond aan een been kent geene vrienden. _A dog with a bone knows no
friend._

Een hongerige buik heeft geen’ ooren. _A hungry belly has no ears._

Een houdaar is beter dan twee gij zult het hebben. _One Take-this is
better than two You-shall-haves._

Een huis van leem, een paard van gras, een vriend van mond, ’t is al
maar glas. _A plaster house, a horse at grass, a friend in words, are
all mere glass._

Een huis vol dochters is een kelder vol zuur bier. _A house full of
daughters is a cellar full of sour beer._

Een ieder is meester in zijn eigen huis. _Every man is master in his
own house._

Een ieder is prediker onder de galg. _Every one is a preacher under the
gallows._

Een jong ooi en een onde ram, daar komt jaarlijks een lam van. _A young
ewe and an old ram, every year bring forth a lamb._

Een kat die veel maauwt vangt weinig muizen. _A cat that meweth much
catcheth but few mice._

Een kat kijkt wel een’ keizer aan. _A cat may look at a king._

Een kleine pot wordt haast heet. _A little pot is soon hot._

Een kuijaar, een bruijaar; een buljaar, een smuljaar. _A cow-year, a
sad year; a bull-year, a glad year._

Een leugenaar moet een goede memorie hebben. _A liar must have a good
memory._

Een luiaard is des duivel’s oorkussen. _An idle man is the devil’s
pillow._

Eenmaal is geen gewoonte. _Once is no custom._

Een mager verdrag is beter dan een vet proces. _A lean compromise is
better than a fat lawsuit._ (_Agree, agree, for the law is costly._)

Een man overboord, een eter te minder. _A man overboard, a mouth the
less._

Een man zonder geld is een schip zonder zeilen. _A man without money is
like a ship without sails._

Een muis, die maar één holletje heeft, is wel dra gevangen. _The mouse
that hath but one hole is soon caught._

Een once geduld is meer dan een pond verstand. _An ounce of patience is
worth a pound of brains._

Een ongeluk komt zelden alleen. _Misfortunes never come single._

Een os en een ezel dienen niet aan een ploeg. _An ox and an ass don’t
yoke well to the same plough._

Een oude rat vindt ligt een gat. _An old rat easily finds a hole._

Een oude rat wil niet in de val. _An old rat won’t go into the trap._

Een oude vos komt niet gemakkelijk twee maal in het garen. _An old fox
doesn’t go twice into the trap._

Een oude wolf is veel gerucht gewend. _An old wolf is used to be
shouted at._

Een oud muilezel met een vergulde toom. _An old mule with a golden
bridle._ (We say, _An old ewe dressed lamb-fashion._)

Een oud voerman hoort gaarn ’t klappen van de zweep. _An old coachman
loves the crack of the whip._

Een paard met vier pooten struikelt wel. _A horse may stumble, though
he has four feet._

Één penning in den spaarpot maakt meer geraas dan als hij vol is. _One
penny in the pot (money-box) makes more noise than when it is full._

Een ploeg die werkt, blinkt; maar ’t stille water stinkt. _A plough
that worketh, shines; but still water stinks._

Een rollende steen neemt geen mos mede. _A rolling stone gathers no
moss._

Één rotte appel in de mande, maakt al de gave fruit te schande. _One
rotten apple in the basket infects the whole._

Één schacht is beter in de hand dan zeven ganzen op het strand. _One
quill is better in the hand than seven geese upon the strand._

Een schurft hoofd ontziet de kam. _A scabby head fears the comb._

Een schurftig schaap bederft de heele kudde. _One scabby sheep infects
the whole flock._

Een spiering uitwerpen om een kabbeljaauw te vangen. _To cast in a
smelt to catch a codfish._

Eens te trouwen is noodwendigheid; tweemaal is malligheid; driemaal is
dolligheid. _To marry once is a duty; twice a folly; thrice is madness._

Een stuiver gespaard is beter dan een gulden gewonnen. _A penny spared
is better than a florin gained._

Een verlopen monnik zeide nooit goed van zijn convent. _A runaway monk
never speaks well of his convent._

Een verloren, twee gevonden. _One lost, two found._

Een vliegende kraai vangt altijd wat. _A flying crow always catches
something._

Één vogel in de hand is beter dan twee in de vlugt. _One bird in the
hand is better than two flying._

Een vos verliest wel zijne haren, maar niet zijne streken. _The fox may
lose his hair, but not his cunning._

Een vriend achter den rug is eene vaste brug. _A friend at one’s back
is a safe bridge._

Een vriend in nood, is een vriend in der daad. _A friend in need is a
friend indeed._

Een vriend is beter dan geld in de beurs. _A friend is better than
money in the purse._ (_Better a friend than money to spend._)

Een vrolijke weerd maakt vrolijke gasten. _A merry host makes merry
guests._

Een wenig te laat, veel te laat. _A little too late, much too late._

Een woekeraar, een molenaar, een wisselaar, een tollenaar, zijn de
vier evangelisten van Lucifer. _A usurer, a miller, a banker, and a
publican, are the four evangelists of Lucifer._

Een wolf hapt noch na ’t schaap als hem de ziele uit gaat. _A wolf
hankers after sheep even at his last gasp._ (_The ruling passion strong
in death._)

Een wrak op strand is een baak op zee. _A wreck on shore is a beacon at
sea._

Een zacht antwoord stilt den toorn. _A soft answer turneth away wrath._

Een zindelijk kleed is eene goede aanbeveling. _A smart coat is a good
letter of introduction._

Eer gij voort rijd, ziet na de lenzen. _Before you mount, look to the
girth._

Eer het gras gewassert is, is de hengst dood. _While the grass grows
the steed starves._

Eerst in de boot, keur van riemen. _The first in the boat has the
choice of oars._

Effene rekeningen maken goede vrienden. _Short reckonings make long
friends._

Effen is kwaad passen. _It is hard to please every one._

Eigen haard is goud waard. _One’s own hearth is worth gold._ (The
Scotch say: _Ane’s ain hearth is goud’s worth._)

Eigenliefde maakt blind. _Self-love is blind._

Elk een zie zichzelven, zoo gaat er niemandt verloren. _Let every one
look to himself, and no one will be lost._

Elke vogel zingt zoo als hij gebekt is. _Every bird sings as it is
beaked._

Elk het zijne, is niet te veel. _Every man his own is not too much._

Elk huis heeft zijn kruis. _Every house has its cross._

Elk is een dief in zijne nering. _Every one is a thief in his own
craft._

Elk moet roeien met de riemen die hij heeft. _Every one must row with
the oars he has._

Elk schot is geen vogel. _Every shot does not bring down a bird._

Elk voor zichzelven, God voor ons allen. _Every one for himself, God
for us all._

Elk waant dat zijn uil een valk is. _Every man thinks his own owl a
falcon._

Elk zijns gelijk, ’t zij arm of rijk. _Like will to like, be they poor
or rich._

Eendragt maakt magt. _Union is strength._

En straft of streelt u vrouwe niet, waar ’t iemand hoort of iemand
ziet. _Neither reprove nor flatter thy wife, where any one heareth or
seeth it._

Er is hulp voor alles, behalve voor den dood. _There is a remedy for
all things save death._

Er is niets zoo verborgen, of het komt uit. _There is nothing so secret
but it transpires._

Er liep geen dolle hond zeven jaar. _No mad dog runs seven years._

Erst eene raap, en dan een schaap; daarna eene koe, dan de galg toe.
_First a turnip, then a sheep; next a cow, and then the gallows._

Eten is een goed begin: het eene beetje brengt het andere. _In eating
’tis good to begin, one morsel helps the other in._


G.

Gebrade duijven vliegen niet door de lucht. _Roast pigeons don’t fly
through the air._

Geduld gaat boven geleerdheid. _Patience surpasses learning._

Gedwee als een handschoen. _Supple as a glove._

Gedwongen liefde vergaat haast. _Forced love does not last._

Geef een’ ezel haver, hij loopt tot de distels. _Give an ass oats and
he runs after thistles._

Geeft hem een talie, en hij zal een el nemen. _Give him an inch and
he’ll take an ell._

Geen beter meesters dan armoede en nood. _No better masters than
poverty and want._

Geen ding met der haast dan vlooijen te vangen. _Nothing in haste but
catching fleas._

Geen ding zoo slecht of het vindt zijn’ meester. _Nothing so bad but it
finds its master._

Geene roozen zonder doornen. _No roses without thorns._

Geen geluk zonder druk. _There is no joy without alloy._

Geen huis of ’t heeft zijn kruis. _No house without its cross._

Geen koorn zonder kaf. _No corn without chaff._

Geen kroon heeft hooftzweer. _A crown is no cure for the headache._

Geen oude schoenen verwerpen eer men nieuwen heeft. _Don’t throw away
your old shoes till you have got new ones._

Geen rijker man in alle steden, dan die met ’tzijne is te vreden. _The
richest man, whatever his lot, is he who’s content with what he has
got._

Geen stouter belovers dan die niets te geven hebben. _No greater
promisers than they who have nothing to give._

Gehuurde paarden maken korte mijlen. _Hired horses make short miles._

Gekoppelde schapen die verdrinken. _Coupled sheep drown one another._

Geld beheert de wereld. _Money rules the world._

Geld doet geweld. _Money is power._

Gelegenheid maakt genegenheid. _Opportunity makes desire._

Gelijk bij gelijk, Jan bij Lijs, het paar een dubbeltje. _Like to like,
Jack to Gill, a penny a pair._

Geluk en glas breekt even ras. _Fortune and glass break soon, alas!_

Gemaalde bloemen ruiken niet. _Painted flowers have no odour._

Gemeen gerucht is zelden gelogen. _Common fame seldom lies._

Gemeen goed, geen goed. _Common goods, no goods._

Genoeg is even zoo goed als een feest. _Enough is as good as a feast._

Genoeg is meer dan overvloed. _Enough is better than too much._

Geweld is geen regt. _Might is not right._

Gewoonte wordt eene tweede natuur. _Custom is second nature._

Gierigheid is niet verzadigd voor zij den mond vol aarde heeft.
_Covetousness is never satisfied till its mouth is filled with earth._

Gij hebt den dans begonnen, en kunt de muziek betalen. _As you began
the dance you may pay the piper._

Gissen doet missen. _Guessing is missing._

God betaalt alle weken niet, maar hij betaalt eens op het einde. _God
does not pay weekly, but pays at the end._

God beware mij voor iemand die maar één boekje gelezen heeft. _God
deliver me from the man of one book._

God geeft de vogelen de kost, maar zij moeten er om vliegen. _God gives
birds their food, but they must fly for it._

God helpt de sterkste. _God helps the strongest._

Gods water over Gods akker laten loopen. _Let God’s waters run over
God’s acres._

God verkoopt wetenschap voor arbeid, eere voor gevaar. _God sells
knowledge for labour, honour for risk._

God zendt hem wel de spijzen, maar de duivel kookt ze. _God sent him
meat, but the devil cooked it._

Goede boom, goede vrucht. _Good tree, good fruit._

Goede dingen moeten tijd hebben. _Good things require time._

Goede drank verdrijft kwade gedachten. _Good drink drives out bad
thoughts._

Goede jagers sporen aan. _Good hunters track narrowly._

Goeden dag u allen! zei de vos, en hij kwam in het ganzenhok. _Good day
to you all! said the fox, when he got into the goose-pen._

Goeden moed in tegenspoed. _A stout heart tempers adversity._

Goede waar prijst zichzelven. _Good wine praises itself._

Goede wijn behoeft geen krans. _Good wine needs no bush._

Goed gezelschap maakt korte mijlen. _Good company makes short miles._

Goed regt behoeft goed hulp. _Good right needs good help._

Goed verloren, niet verloren; moed verloren, veel verloren; eer
verloren, meer verloren; ziel verloren, al verloren. _Fortune lost,
nothing lost; courage lost, much lost; honour lost, more lost; soul
lost, all lost._

Goed vuur maakt een snellen kok. _A good fire makes a quick cook._

Gramschap is een korte dolligheid. _Anger is a short madness._

Grijp de gelegentheit, wanneer ze voor u staat; als ze eens voorbij is,
dan begeert gij haar te laat. _The first occasion offered quickly take,
lest thou repine at what thou didst forsake._

Groote begeerlijkheid, maakt eenen kleinen hoop. _Great greediness to
reap, helps not the money-heap._

Groote belovers, slechte betalers. _Great promisers, bad paymasters._

Groote dieven hangen de kleine. _Great thieves hang little thieves._

Groote narren moeten groote bellen hebben. _Great fools must have great
bells._

Groote visschen springen uit de ketel. _Big fish spring out of the
kettle._

Groote visschen eten de kleine. _Big fish devour the little ones._

Groote visschen scheuren het net. _Great fishes break the net._

Groot goed, groot zorg. _Great wealth, great care._

Groot roemen, weinig gebraad. _Great boast, little roast._

Groot-sprekers zijn geene groot-daders. _Great talkers are little
doers._


H.

Haast en is geen spoed, snelle raad, zelden baat. _Of hasty counsel
take good heed, for haste is very rarely speed._

Haast getrouwd, lang berouwd. _Marry in haste and repent at leisure._

Haastigen spoed is zelden goed. _Hasty speed don’t oft succeed._

Haastigheid is de aanvang, berouw het einde des toorns. _Hastiness is
the beginning of wrath, and its end repentance._

Haast verkwist. _Haste makes waste._

Handelt gij pek, gij krijgt een vlek. _If thou touchest pitch thou
shalt be defiled._

Hannibal is voor de deur. _Hannibal is at the gate._

Haring in ’t land, de doctor aan kant. _Herring in the land, the doctor
at a stand._

Heden in figuur, morgen in het graf. _To-day stately and brave,
to-morrow in the grave._

Heden rood, morgen dood. _To-day red, to-morrow dead._

Helpt gij een’ bedelaar te paard hij draaft niet maar hij galoppeert.
_Set a beggar on horseback, and he don’t trot, but gallops._

Help u zelven zoo helpt u God. _Help yourself and God will help you._

Het beste goed is de beste koop. _The best goods are the cheapest._

Het beste paard struikelt wel eens. _The best horse stumbles sometimes._

Het blijft hem aan de vingers hangen, als der goede vrouw de aalmoes.
_It sticks to his fingers, like the charity-money to the matron._

Het duister en de nachten, zijn moeders van gedachten. _Darkness and
night are mothers of thought._

Het eene kwaad brengt het andere mede. _One misfortune brings on
another._

Het einde kroont het werk. _The end crowns all._

Het einde van de vrolijkheid is het begin van de treurigheid. _The end
of mirth is the beginning of sorrow._

Het eindje is de dood. _The end of all things is death._

Het end goed, alles goed. _All’s well that ends well._

Het geen gij schenken kunt, zoek daar geen voordeel in; den goeden goed
doen, is te reek’nen voor gewin. _Give at first asking what you safely
can; ’tis certain gain to help an honest man._

Het geld is de zenuw des oorlogs. _Money is the sinew of war._

Het geluk is rond; den eenen maakt het koning den anderen stront.
_Fortune is round; it makes one a king, another a dunghill._

Het geluk staat niet stil voor iemands deur. _Fortune does not stand
waiting at any one’s door._

Het hangt aan een zijden draadje. _It hangs upon a silken thread._

Het heeft veel meels van noode, die iedereen den mond stoppen zal. _He
need have plenty of meal who would stop every man’s mouth._ (Scotch:
_He behoves to have meal enou, that sal stop ilka man’s mou’._)

Het hemd is my nader dan de rok. _My shirt is nearer than my cloak._

Het herte en liegt niet. _The heart does not lie._

Het hoen, dat het meest kakelt, geeft de meeste eijers niet. _It is not
the hen which cackles most that lays most eggs._

Het is alles niet goud wat er blinkt. _All is not gold that glitters._

Het is best te vrijen, daar men de rook kan zien. _’Tis best woo where
a man can see the smoke._

Het is beter hard geblazen dan de mond gebrand. _It is better to blow
than burn your mouth._

Het is beter te bedelen dan te stelen. _Better beg than steal._

Het is de dood in de pot. _Death is in the pot._

Het is den eenen bedelaar leed, dat de andere voor de deur staat. _It
is a grief to one beggar that another stands at the door._

Het is den eenen hond leed dat d’ander in de keuken gaat. _It grieveth
one dog that the other goeth into the kitchen._

Het is den moriaan geschuurd. _To wash a blackamoor white._

Het is een aristocraat in folio. _He is an aristocrat in folio._

Het is een arme muis die maar één hol heeft. _It is a poor mouse that
has but one hole._

Het is eene lange laan, die geen’ draai heeft. _It’s a long lane that
has no turning._

Het is een goed schutter die altijd het wit schiet. _He must shoot well
who always hits the mark._

Het is een goed spreker die een goed zwijger verbeterd. _It is good
speaking that improves good silence._

Het is een harde brok daar men aan wurgt. _It is a hard morsel that
chokes._

Het is een kwade wel daar men water in draagt. _It is a bad well into
which one must put water._

Het is een theologant als Judas een apostel. _He is as good a divine as
Judas was an apostle._

Het is een vette vogel die hem zelf bedruipt. _’Tis a fat bird that
bastes itself._

Het is een wijs kind dat zijn vader kent. _’Tis a wise child that knows
its own father._

Het is geene kunst geld te winnen, maar te bewaren. _The art is not in
making money, but in keeping it._

Het is geen koopman die altijd wint. _He is no merchant who always
gains._

Het is genoegelijk te zien regenen, als men in den drooge staat. _It’s
pleasant to look on the rain, when one stands dry._

Het is God, die geneest en de dokter trekt het geld. _God cures, and
the doctor gets the money._

Het is goed dat kwade koeijen korte horens hebben. _’Tis well that
wicked cows have short horns._

Het is goed met heel vel slapen gaan. _It is good to sleep in a whole
skin._

Het is goed mild zijn uit eens anders beurs. _It is easy to be liberal
out of another man’s purse._

Het is goed snijden riemen uit eens andermans leer. _It is easy to cut
thongs from other men’s leather._

Het is goed spinnen van eens ander mans garen. _It is good spinning
from another’s yarn._

Het is goedt dansen op een ander mans vloer. _It’s good dancing on
another man’s floor._

Het is goed te voet gaan als men het rijden moe word. _It is good to go
afoot when one is tired of riding._

Het is goedt feest houden op een anders zaal. _It’s good feasting in
another’s hall._

Het is goed warmen by een anders vuur. _It is good to warm oneself by
another’s fire._

Het is goed wijsheid dat wijsheid is in ’t ende. _That is good wisdom
which is wisdom in the end._

Het is haast gedaan dat lange rouwt. _That’s quickly done which is long
repented._

Het is kwaad bij duister eene speld te vinden. _It is hard to find a
pin in the dark._

Het is kwaad gekken met scherp gereedschap. _It’s ill jesting with
edged tools._

Het is kwaad hazen met trommels vangen. _It is ill catching hares with
drums._

Het is kwaad kammen daar geen haar is. _It’s bad combing where there is
no hair._

Het is kwaad stelen waar de waard zelf een dief is. _It is hard to
steal where the host is a thief._

Het is niet al goud dat er blinkt. _All is not gold that glitters._

Het is niet alle dag feestdag. _Every day is not holiday._

Het is profeten-drank. _It is prophet-drink_ (i. e. _water_).

Het is te laat den stal te sluiten als het paard gestolen is. _It is
too late to lock the stable door when the steed is stolen._

Het is te laat gespaard, als het vat ten einde gaat. _’Tis too late to
spare when the cask is bare._

Het is te laat sta vast te zeggen, als de pijl uit den boog is. _It is
too late to cry “Hold hard!” when the arrow has left the bow._

Het is veel beter tweemaal gemeten, dan eens en het beste vergeten.
_Better twice remembered than once forgotten._

Het is zoo veel als een boon in een brouw ketel. _That’s as much as a
bean in a brewing copper._

Het komt ten lesten aan den dag, wat in de sneeuw verholen lag. _What
lay hidden under the snow cometh to light at last._

Het moet een wijze hand zijn, die een zotte kop wel scheeren zal. _It
needs a cunning hand to shave a fool’s head._

Het moet wel een goed meester zijn, die nimmer fouten maakt. _He must
indeed be a good master who never errs._

Het oog van den meester maakt de paarden vet, en dat van het vrouwtje
de kamers net. _The eye of the master makes the horse fat, and that of
the mistress the chambers neat._

Het slechtste rad maakt het meeste geraas. _The worst wheel makes most
noise._

Het verdriet brengt geen duit voordeel aan. _To-day’s sorrow brings
nought to-morrow._ (_Sorrow will pay no debts._)

Het vermaak streelt de zinnen. _Pleasures steal away the mind._

Het vloeit als een fontein uit een’ bezemstok. _It flows like a
fountain from a broomstick._

Het vossenvel aan den leeuwenhuid hechten. _To piece the lion’s skin
with that of the fox._

Het wapen van Brugge: een ezel in een’ leuningstoel. _The arms of
Bruges: an ass in an arm-chair._

Het zijn niet alle koks die lange messen dragen. _All are not cooks who
wear long knives._

Het zijn niet alle vrienden die eenen toelachen. _All are not friends
who smile on you._

Hij beoordeelt een ieder naar zich zelven. _He measures others by his
own standard._

Hij blijft bij zijn woord, als de zon bij de boter. _He keeps his word,
as the sun keeps butter._

Hij brandt de kaars aan beide einden. _He burns the candle at both
ends._

Hij domineert als een aal in de tobbe. _He lords it (or swaggers) like
an eel in a tub._

Hij gaapt als een boer op eene jaarmarkt. _He gapes like a clown at a
fair._

Hij heeft den bijbel wel in den mond, maar niet in het hart. _He has
the Bible on his lips, but not in his heart._

Hij heeft den wolf gezien. _He has seen the wolf._

Hij heeft de schrift vast den bijbel van 52 bladen. _He studies the
Bible of fifty-two leaves (a pack of cards)._

Hij heeft eene ton vol kennis, maar de bodem is er uit. _He has a ton
of knowledge, but the bottom is out._

Hij heeft eene wolfs-conscientie. _He has a wolf-conscience._

Hij heeft een goede meening, maar eene kwade uitspraak. _He means well,
but has a bad way of showing it._

Hij heeft hem onder den duim. _He has him under his thumb._

Hij heeft het nest-ei verloren. _He has lost the nest-egg._

Hij heeft liever den beker dan den bijbel in de hand. _He would rather
have a bumper in hand than a Bible._

Hij huilt met de wolven, en blaat met de schapen. _He howls with the
wolves, and bleats with the sheep._

Hij is een extract van schurken. _He is an essence of scoundrels._

Hij is geboren op Sint-Galperts nacht, drie dagen voor ’t geluk. _He
was born upon St. Galtpert’s night, three days before luck._

Hij is geslepen als een looden pook. _He is as sharp as a leaden
dagger._

Hij is te dom, om alleen bij het vuur te zitten. _He is too stupid to
be trusted alone by the fire._

Hij is te lui on zijn’ adem te halen. _He is too idle to fetch his
breath._

Hij is te vangen als een haas met een trommel. _He is as easily caught
as a hare with drums._

Hij is uit de hel gekropen toen de duivel sliep. _He must have crept
out of hell while the devil was asleep._

Hij is van de familie Jan Van Kleef; liever van de heb dan van de geef.
_He is of the race of Johnny Van Cleeve; who would always much rather
have than give._

Hij is wel edel, die edele werken doet. _He is noble who performs noble
deeds._

Hij is zoo arm als Job. _He is as poor as Job._

Hij is zoo paapsch als Duc d’Alfs hond; die at vleesch in de vasten.
_He is as good a Catholic as Duke Alva’s dog; who ate flesh in Lent._

Hij is zoo welkom als de eerste dag in de vasten. _He is as welcome as
the first day in Lent._ (_Alluding to fast-day._)

Hij is zoo wijs, dat hij drie dagen eerder op het ijs gaat, dan het
vriest. _He is so wise, that he goes upon the ice three days before it
freezes._

Hij kan geen ei leggen, maar hij kan kakelen. _He cannot lay eggs, but
he can cackle._

Hij koopt den honig wel duur, die ze van de doornen moet lekken. _He
buys honey dear who has to lick it off thorns._

Hij krimpt als een aal. _He wriggles like an eel._

Hij leeft in het land van belofte. _He lives in the land of promise._

Hij legt zijne eijeren buiten zijn nest. _He lays his eggs beside his
nest._

Hij loopt zoo snel, of hij eijeren in zijne schoenen had. _He runs as
fast as if he had eggs in his shoes._

Hij moet vroeg op staan die alle man believen wil. _He must rise
betimes who would please everybody._

Hij moet wijd gapen, die tegen een oven gapen zal. _He must gape wide
who would gape against an oven._

Hij telt zijne kiekens, eer de eijers gelegd zijn. _He counts his
chickens before they are hatched._

Hij treedt zoo moedig als een Engelsche haan. _He struts as valiantly
as an English cock._

Hij verdient een’ stuiver en heeft wel voor een’ braspenning dorst. _He
earns a farthing and has a penn’orth of thirst._

Hij waar wijs die alle dingen te voren wist. _He would be wise who knew
all things beforehand._

Hij wacht lang, die naar eens anders dood wacht. _He waits long that
waits for another man’s death._

Hij wil vliegen eer hij vleugels heeft. _He wants to fly before he has
wings._

Hij zal den schel-visch in de boomen vangen. _He thinks to catch
shell-fish in the trees._

Hij zegt duivel en meent u. _He said devil, but meant you._

Hij zou een cent in tweeën bijten. _He would bite a cent in two._

Hij zwemt op zijne eigene biezen. _He swims on his own bullrush._

Hoe edeler boom hoe buigzamer tak. _The nobler the tree, the more
pliant the twig._

Hoe grooter jurist, hoe boozer Christ. _The better lawyer, the worse
Christian._

Hoe hooger berg, hoe dieper dal; hoe hooger boom, hoe zwaarder val.
_The higher the mountain the lower the vale, the taller the tree the
harder the fall._

Hoe kwader schalk, hoe beter geluk. _The worse service, the better
luck._

Hoe meerder dienstboden hoe slechter dienst. _The more servants the
worse service._

Hoe meerder haast, hoe minder spoed. _The more haste, the less speed._

Hoe meer men de stront roert, hoe meer ze stinkt. _The more you stir a
t—d, the more it stinks._

Hoe nader het been, hoe zoeter vleesch. _The nearer the bone the
sweeter the flesh._

Hoe ouder men wordt, hoe meer men leert. _The older one grows, the more
one learns._

Hoe schurfter schaap, hoe harder geblaat. _The scabbier the sheep the
harder it bleats._

Hoe slimmer timmerman hoe meerder spaanders. _The worse the carpenter
the more the chips._

Hoe slimmer wiel, hoe meer het kraakt. _The worse the wheel, the more
it creaks._

Hoe verder van Rome, hoe nader bij God. _The farther from Rome the
nearer to God._

Honden hebben tanden in alle landen. _Dogs have teeth in all countries._

Honderd bakkers, honderd molenaars, en honderd kleêrmakers zijn drie
honderd dieven. _A hundred bakers, a hundred millers, and a hundred
tailors are three hundred thieves._

Hooge boomen geven meer schaduuw dan vruchten. _High trees give more
shadow than fruit._

Hooge boomen vangen veel wind. _Tall trees catch much wind._

Honger drijft den wolf uit het bosch. _Hunger drives the wolf out of
the wood._

Honger eet door steenen muuren. _Hunger eats through stone walls._

Honger is de beste saus. _Hunger is the best sauce._

Hooren zeggen is half gelogen. _Hearsay is half lies._


I.

Ieder zot heeft zijn zotskap. _To every fool his cap._

Iemand den zak geeven. _To give one the sack._

Iemand met gelijke munt betalen. _To pay one in his own coin._

Ik ben hier niet om vliegen te vangen. _I am not here to catch flies._

Ik heb alles van goud en zilver, zelfs mijne koperen ketels, zei de
grootspreker. _All my goods are of silver and gold, even my copper
kettles, says the boaster._

Ik heb een mond die geve ik te eten, die moet spreken wat ik wil. _I
have a mouth which I feed, it must speak what I please._

Ik mag over mijn rekening gaan, maar niet over mijn tijd. _I may go
over my reckoning, but not over my time._

Ik zal er mij op beslapen. _I’ll sleep on it._

In den nood leert men zijne vrienden kennen. _Friends are known in time
of need._

In een arm mans hoofd blijft veel wijsheid versmoort. _Much wisdom is
smothered in a poor man’s head._

In geluk voorzigtigheid, in ongeluk geduld. _In prosperity caution, in
adversity patience._

In ’t deelen van ’t erf, staat de vriendschap stil. _In the division of
inheritance, friendship standeth still._

In het land der blinden is een-oog koning. _In the land of the blind
the one-eyed is a king._

In het land van belofte sterft men wel van honger. _In the land of
promise a man may die of hunger._

In kleine bosschen vangt men wel een’ grooten haas. _In small woods may
be caught large hares._

In troebel water is’t goed visschen. _It is good fishing in troubled
waters._

In voorspoed denkt op tegenspoed. _In prosperity think of adversity._

In zijne vuist lagchen. _To laugh in one’s sleeve._

Is de eene traag, de ander is graag. _If one won’t another will._


J.

Jonge katten willen muizen, jonge apen willen luizen. _Young cats will
mouse, young apes will louse._

Jonge lieden kunnen, maar oude lieden moeten sterven. _The young may
die, the old must._

Jonge lui, domme lui; oude lui, koude lui. _Young folk, silly folk; old
folk, cold folk._

Jong rijs is te buigen, maar geen oude boomen. _Young twigs may be
bent, but not old trees._


K.

Kasteelen in de lucht bouwen. _To build castles in the air._

Kleine dieven hangt men aan den hals, de groote aan de beurs. _Little
thieves are hanged by the neck, great thieves by the purse._

Kleine dieven hebben ijzeren, en groote, gouden ketenen. _Little
thieves have iron chains, and great thieves gold ones._

Kleine houwen vellen groote eiken. _Little strokes fell great oaks._

Kleine potten loopen gaauw over. _Little pots soon run over._

Klein gewin brengt rijkdom in. _Small gains bring great wealth._

Klein vischje zoet vischje. _Little fish are sweet._ (_All is fish that
comes to the net._)

Koffij heeft twee deugden, ze is warm en nat. _Coffee has two virtues,
it is wet and warm._

Kom ik over den hond, zoo kom ik over den staart. _Let me get over the
lake, and I have no fear of the brook._

Komt de duivel in de kerk, dan wil hij op het hoogaltaar zitten. _When
the devil gets into the church he seats himself on the altar._

Koopmans goed is ebbe en vloed. _Merchants’ goods are ebb and flood._

Koopt geen kat in een zak. _Don’t buy a cat in a sack._ (_Don’t buy a
pig in a poke._)

Kostbaare dingen doet men in kleine doosjes. _Precious things are
mostly in small compass._ (_In small boxes the best spice._)

Kosters koe weidt op het kerkhof. _The beadle’s cow may graze in the
churchyard._

Kraauwt mij, en ik kraauw dij. _Claw me, and I’ll claw thee._

Krakende wagens duuren het langst. _Creaking carts last the longest._

Kwaad ei, kwaad kuiken. _Bad egg, bad chick._

Kwaad gezelschap zei de dief, en hij ging tusschen den beul en eenen
monnik naar de galg. _”Bad company,” said the thief, as he went to the
gallows between the hangman and a monk._

Kwaad kruid wast wel. _Ill weeds grow apace._

Kwade tijding komt tijds genoeg. _Ill tidings come soon enough._

Kwalijk begonnen, kwalijk geslaagd. _Ill begun, ill done._


L.

Laat geen kind vuile reeden hooren, want kleine potten hebben groote
ooren. _Of listening children have your fears, for little pitchers have
great ears._

Lang vasten is geen brood sparen. _Long fasting is no bread sparing._

Langzamerhand volbouwt de vogel zijn nest. _By slow degrees the bird
builds his nest._

Ledige vaten brommen het meest. _Empty vessels make the most sound._

Ledigheid is hongers moeder, en van diefte volle broeder. _Idleness is
hunger’s mother, and of theft it is full brother._

Leent uwen vriend en maant uwen vijand. _Your friend lends and your
enemy asks payment._

Leer van geleerden: gy moet de ongeleerden leeren, dus zal de
wetenschap der dingen zich vermeeren. _Learn thou of learned men, th’
unlearned of thee; for thus must knowledge propagated be._

Ligt gekomen, ligt gegaan. _Lightly come, lightly gone._

Ligt gewin maakt zware beurzen. _Light gains make a heavy purse._

Loon verzoet den arbeid. _Reward sweetens labour._

Luiheid is de aanvang van alle ondeugd. _Sloth is the beginning of
vice._

Lust maakt den arbeid ligt. _Love makes labour light._


M.

Maai liever twee dagen te vroeg dan een dag te laat. _Better reap two
days too soon than one too late._

Magere luizen bijten het hardst. _Starved lice bite the hardest._

Magere vlooijen bijten scherp. _Hungry flies bite sore._

Meer geluk dan wijsheid. _More luck than wit._

Meet driemaal eer gij eens snijd. _Measure thrice before you cut once._

Men dempt den put als het kalf verdronken is. _When the calf is drowned
they cover the well._

Menigeen zoekt goede nachten, en verliest goede dagen. _Many seek good
nights and lose good days._

Men kan beter van eene boerin eene juffrouw maken dan van eene juffrouw
eene boerin. _It is easier to make a lady of a peasant-girl than a
peasant-girl of a lady._

Men kan een ezel tegen zijn wil niet doen drinken. _There’s no making a
donkey drink against his will._

Men kan geen loopend paard beslaan. _One can’t shoe a running horse._

Men kan ligt een stok vinden, als men den hond wil slaan. _It is easy
to find a stick to beat a dog._

Men kan van een varkensoor geene fluweelen beurs maken. _There’s no
making a silk purse of a sow’s ear._

Men kent een man niet eer voor dat hij komt tot eer. _A man is not
known till he cometh to honour._

Men komt niet lagchende in den Hemel. _Men go not laughing to heaven._

Men moet alle zijne eijeren niet in ééne mand doen. _Put not all your
eggs into one basket._

Men moet de huid niet willen verdeelen voor dat de beer dood is. _Don’t
sell the bearskin before the bear is dead._

Men moet de koe wel melken, maar de spenen niet aftrekken. _Milk the
cow, but don’t pull off the udder._

Men moet den Keizer geven het geen des Keizers is. _Render unto Cæsar
the things that are Cæsar’s._

Men moet leven en laten leven. _Live, and let live._

Men moet de ploeg niet voor de paarden spannen. _Don’t yoke the plough
before the horses._

Men moet de schapen scheren, maar niet villen. _Shear the sheep, but
don’t flay them._

Men moet de steel de bijl niet na werpen. _Don’t throw the handle after
the bill._

Men moet eten, al waren alle boomen galgen. _A man must eat, though
every tree were a gallows._

Men moet zeilen terwijl de wind dient. _Men must sail while the wind
serveth._

Men moet zomwijl de duivel een kaars ontsteeken. _One must sometimes
hold a candle to the devil._

Men plukt de gans, zoo lang zij vederen heeft. _Geese are plucked as
long as they have any feathers._

Men spreekt zoo lang van een ding, totdat het komt. _What is long
spoken of happens at last._ (_Long looked for comes at last._)

Men vangt meer vliegen met een’ lepel stroop dan met een vat azijn.
_More flies are caught with a spoonful of syrup than with a cask of
vinegar._

Men vangt geen hazen met trommels. _Hares are not caught with drums._

Men vangt het paard bij den breidel, en den man bij zijn woord. _Take a
horse by his bridle and a man by his word._

Met al te veel kakelens, wordt de waarheid verloren. _Truth is lost
with too much debating._

Met arbeyd krijgt men vuur uit den steen. _By labour fire is got out of
a stone._

Met de levenden begraaft men de dooden. _By the living we bury the
dead._

Met dieven vangt men dieven. _Set a thief to catch a thief._

Met hertensvrienden mijd van twisten zelfs ’t begin: want gramschap
teelt maar haat; en eendragt voed de min. _Forbear a quarrel with a
friend to move: anger breeds hatred; concord sweetens love._

Met ledige handen is het kwaad havikken vangen. _It’s hard to catch
hawks with empty hands._ (_With emptie hands men may no haukes
lure._—CHAUCER.)

Met leêge handen is kwaad te markt te gaan. _It is bad marketing with
empty pockets._

Met onwillige honden is kwaad hazen vangen. _It is hard to catch hares
with unwilling hounds._

Met tijd en stroo rijpen de mispelen. _Time and straw make medlars
ripe._

Metter tijt bijt de muis een kabel in stukken. _In time a mouse will
gnaw through a cable._

Met vallen leert men zeker gaan. _By falling we learn to go safely._

Met veel slagens wordt de stok-visch murwer. _Stock-fish are made
tender by much beating._

Met vollen mond is ’t kwaad blazen. _It is hard to blow with a full
mouth._

Mostaard na den maaltijd. _After meat comes mustard._


N.

Naaste buur naaste bloedvriend als het kalf in de groef ligt. _The
nearest boor is the nearest kinsman when the calf lies in the ditch._

Na de ebbe komt de vloed, en de vrienden met het goed. _After ebb comes
flood, and friends with good._

Na den regen komt het mooije weêr. _After rain comes fair weather._

Na eer en staat volgt nijd en haat. _After honour and state follow envy
and hate._

Na groote droogte komt groote regen. _After great droughts come great
rains._

Na het zuure komt het zoet. _After the sour comes the sweet._

Na hooge vloeden diepe ebben. _After high floods come low ebbs._

Na regen komt zonneschijn. _After rain comes sunshine._

Neem een Brabandsch schaap, een’ Gelderschen os, een Vlaamsch kapoen,
en eene Friesche koe. _Choose a Brabant sheep, a Guelder ox, a Flemish
capon, and a Friezeland cow._

Neemt nooit bij de hand dat u hier na mocht rouwen. _Take nothing in
hand that may bring repentance._

Niemand gelukkig voor zijnen dood. _No man knoweth fortune till he
dies._

Niemand is wijs in zijn eigen zaak. _No one is wise in his own affairs._

Niemand kan langer vrede hebben dan zijn buurman wil. _No one can have
peace longer than his neighbour pleases._

Niemand leert als met schade of schande. _No man learneth but by pain
or shame._

Niemand’s lief is lelijk. _Nobody’s sweetheart is ugly._

Niemand weet waar een ander de schoen wringt. _No one knows where
another’s shoe pinches._

Niemand zoo zeker of hij kan missen. _No one so sure but he may miss._

Niet doen, leert kwaad doen. _To do nothing teacheth to do evil._

Nieuwe bezems vegen schoon. _New brooms sweep clean._

Nijd krijt van spijt waar eere rijd. _Envy crieth of spite where honour
rideth._

Nog beter is het, verloren arbeid gedaan, dan in ledigheid zich te
verliezen. _Better lose your labour than your time in idleness._

Nood breekt ijzer. _Necessity breaks iron._

Nood breekt wet. _Necessity knows no law._

Nooit ambtje zoo kleen, of het is beter dan geen. _No office so humble
but it is better than nothing._


O.

Olie in het vuur werpen. _To throw oil on the fire._

Om eene kleine zaak eet de wolf het schaap. _On a small pretence the
wolf devours the sheep._

Onder een staand zeil is goed roeijen. _It is good rowing with set
sail._

Ongelegde eijeren zijn onzekere kuikens. _Unlaid eggs are uncertain
chickens._

Ongelijke paarden trekken kwalijk. _Ill-matched horses draw badly._

Onkruid vergaat nooit. _Ill weeds grow apace._

Ons tijd verloopt gelijk een stroom; en naar het blad zoo valt den
boom. _Our time runs on like a stream; first fall the leaves and then
the tree._

Onthoud dit, lieve vriend, het is een wijzen raad: ontkleed u
nimmermeer eer dat gy slapen gaat. _Precaution said, Good friend, this
counsel keep: strip not yourself until you’re laid to sleep._

Ook hazen trekken een leeuw bij den baard als hij dood is. _Even hares
pull a lion by the beard when he is dead._

Oost, west, t’huis best. _East or west, home is best._

Op een’ gebaanden weg groeit geen gras. _Grass grows not upon the
highway._

Op een’ witten Spanjaard en op een’ zwarten Engelschman moet men
achtgeven. _Beware of a white Spaniard and a black Englishman._

Op haastige vragen dient traag geantwoord. _Hasty questions require
slow answers._

Oude honden is kwaad bassen te leeren. _It is hard to teach old dogs to
bark._

Oude vogelen zijn niet met katten vangen. _Old birds are not caught
with cats._

Oude vossen zijn kwaad te vangen. _Old foxes are hard to catch._

Over een haverstroo twisten. _To quarrel over a straw._


P.

Paarlen voor de varkens strooijen. _To cast pearls before swine._

Praatjes vullen geen gaatjes. _Fine words don’t fill the belly._


R.

Raad voor daad. _Counsel before action._

Raakt een bezeerd paard aan, en hij zal slaan. _Touch a galled horse
and he’ll wince._

Raders zijn geene gelders. _Advisers are not givers._

Rijd voort, maar ziet om. _Ride on, but look before you._

Rijke lui hebben veel vrienden. _The rich have many friends._

Roep geen hei, eer gij overgekomen zijt. _Don’t cry holloa! till you’re
out of the bush._

Roep geen hei, voor gij over de brug zijt. _Don’t cry holloa! till
you’re over the bridge._

Roept geen haring eer hij in ’t net is. _Don’t cry herrings till they
are in the net._

Rook, stank, en kwaade wijven zijn die de mans uit de huizen drijven.
_Smoke, stench, and a troublesome wife are what drive men from home._

Rust maakt roest. _Rest makes rusty._


S.

Schande duurt langer dan armoede. _Shame lasts longer than poverty._

Schoenmaker, blijf bij u leest. _Shoemaker, stick to your last._

Schoone appelen zijn ook wel zuur. _Handsome apples are sometimes sour._

Schoone woorden vullen den zak niet. _Fair words won’t fill the sack._

Schoon geld kan veel vuil dekken. _Fair money can cover much that’s
foul._

Schoonheid is maar drek als de eerbaarheid verloren is. _Beauty is but
dross if honesty be lost._

Schuim is geen bier. _Froth is no beer._

Slapende honden zal men niet wakker maken. _Wake not a sleeping dog._

Smeed het ijzer terwijl het heet is. _Strike whilst the iron is hot._

Snijd uw mantel naar uw laken. _Cut your coat according to your cloth._

Spaanderen naar Noorwegen brengen. _To carry fir-trees to Norway._ (_To
carry coals to Newcastle._)

Span den boog niet al te sterk, want dan barst hij. _Strain not your
bow beyond its bent, lest it break._

Spillen is een kwade gewoonte, sparen is een wisse rente. _Wasting is a
bad habit, sparing a sure income._

Spreekt zij Engelsch? _Do you speak English?_ (Meaning, _Have you got
any money?_ We used to say in England, _Have you got any Spanish?_)

Spreekwoorden zijn dochters der dagelijksche ondervinding. _Proverbs
are the daughters of daily experience._

Spreken is zilver, zwijgen is goud. _Speaking is silver, silence is
gold._

Sta maar een wijl, gij verliest een mijl. _Stay a while, and lose a
mile._

Steek de hand in de conscientie, en zie of ze er niet pik zwaart weder
uitkomt. _Put your hand in your conscience and see if it don’t come out
as black as pitch._

Steek uw vinger in geen dwazens mond. _Thrust not thy finger in a
fool’s mouth._

Steek uw voeten niet verder dan uw bed reikt. _Stretch your legs no
farther than your coverlet._

Stille waters hebben diepe gronden. _Still waters are deep._

Streelje den hond, hij bederft uw kleed. _Caress your dog, and he’ll
spoil your clothes._

Strooit geen rozen voor varkens. _Strew no roses before swine._


T.

Tegen stroom is kwaad zwemmen. _It is hard to swim against the stream._

Tegen wind en stroom kan men niet opzeilen. _It is ill sailing against
wind and tide._

Te veel is kwaad genoeg, zij dat wat gij geniet; een schip vaart
veiligst door een’ niet te sterken vliet. _Rejoice in little, shun what
is extreme; the ship rides safest in a little stream._

Te veel van een ding is nergens nut toe. _Too much of one thing is good
for nothing._

Tijd en plaats doen den dief stelen. _Time and place make the thief._

Tijd gewonnen, veel gewonnen. _Time gained, much gained._

Tijd is geld. _Time is money._

Toen Adam spitte en Eva span, waar vond men toen den edelman? _When
Adam delved and Eve span, who was then the gentleman?_

Trekt men één varken bij den staart dan schreeuwen zij allen. _If you
pull one pig by the tail all the rest squeak._

Tucht baart vrucht. _Correction bringeth fruit._

Tusschen den hamer en het aanbeeld. _Between the hammer and the anvil._

Tusschen lepel en mond, valt het sop te grond. _’Twixt the spoon and
the lip, the morsel may slip._

Tusschen twee stoelen valt de aars op de aarde. _Between two stools the
breech cometh to the ground._

Twee appelen met éénen stok afwerpen. _To bring down two apples with
one stick._

Twee hanen in een huis, de kat met de muis, een oud man en een ijongwn
wijf geeft eeuwig gekijf. _Two cocks in one house, a cat and a mouse,
an old man and young wife, are always in strife._

Twee honden aan een been komen zelden overeen. _Two dogs seldom agree
over one bone._

Twee vliegen met éénen klap slaan. _To kill two birds with one stone._


U.

Uit den overvloed des harten spreekt de mond. _Out of the abundance of
the heart the mouth speaketh._

Uit het oog, uit het hart. _Out of sight, out of mind._


V.

Vaart gij dan oost, of vaarje west, eens eigen huis is alder best.
_Travel east or travel west, a man’s own house is still the best._

Van daag voor geld, en morgen voor niet. _To-day for money, to-morrow
for nothing._

Van de boot komt men in het schip. _From the boat we get to the ship._

Van den hak op den tak springen. _To make coqs-à-l’âne._

Van den nood eene deugd maken. _To make a virtue of necessity._

Van den wal in de sloot vallen. _To fall from the wall into the ditch._
(_Out of the frying-pan into the fire._)

Van de vonken brandt ’t huis. _From a spark the house is burnt._

Van dreigen sterft man niet. _Threats don’t kill._ (_Men don’t die of
threats._)

Van een anders leer is goed riemen snijden. _It is pleasant to cut
thongs of another man’s leather._

Van een’ vlieg een’ olijfant maaken. _To make an elephant of a fly._
(_To make a mountain of a mole-hill._)

Van ’t klein komt men tot ’t groote. _From little things men go on to
great._

Van kleine beginselen komt men tot groote zaken. _From small beginnings
come great things._

Van kleine dingen komt dikwijls groote hinder. _From trivial things
great contests oft arise._

Van twee kwalen moet men de ergste mijden. _Of two evils choose the
least._

Van vader komt eere, van moeder gemak. _From the father comes honour,
from the mother comfort._

Van verre gehaalt en duur gekocht, is eten voor me vrouwen. _Far
fetched and dear bought is meat for ladies._

Veeg eerst voor uwe eigene deur, en dan voor die uws buurmans. _Sweep
before your own door before you look after your neighbour’s._

Veele handen maaken ligt werk. _Many hands make light work._

Veele woorden vullen geen zak. _Many words don’t fill the sack._
(Scoticè: _Meikle crack fills nae sack._)

Veel geschreeuw maar weinig wol, zei de drommel, en hij schoor zijne
varkens. _Great cry and little wool, quoth the devil, when he sheared
his hogs._

Veel geschreeuws, en luttel wol. _Great cry and little wool._

Veel herders by de schapen, zullen maar te langer slapen. _When many
shepherds tend the sheep, they but so much the longer sleep._

Veel honden is der hazen dood. _Many hounds are the death of the hare._

Veel hoofden, veel zinnen. _Many heads, many minds._

Veel kleintjes maken een groot. _Many littles make a mickle._

Veel koks verzouten de brij. _Too many cooks oversalt the porridge._

Veel praats en weinig werks. _Much talk little work._

Velen openen een deur om een venster te sluiten. _Many open a door to
shut a window._

Verdraagt het geen gij door uw eigen schuld lijdt. _Bear patiently that
which thou sufferest by thine own fault._

Verkoop den huid niet, voor gij den beer hebt gevangen. _Don’t sell the
skin till you’ve caught the bear._

Verloren eer, keert nimmermeer. _Honour once lost never returns._

Verstandigen staan naar ampten en de dom-ooren krijgen ze. _Wise men
sue for offices, and blockheads get them._

Viel den hemel, daar en bleef geen aarden pot heel. _Were the sky to
fall, not an earthen pot would be left whole._

Voet voor voet gaat men ver. _Step by step one goes far._

Vogels van gelijke veeren vliegen graag t’zamen. _Birds of a feather
flock together._

Volle flesschen en glazen maken vloekers en dwazen. _Full bottles and
glasses make swearers and asses._

Voor dag uit, voor nacht in. _Out before day, in before night._

Voor groote kwalen sterke hulpmiddelen. _For great evils strong
remedies._

Voor stroom en wind is goed zeilen. _It is good sailing with wind and
tide._

Voorzigtigheid is de moeder der fijne bierglazen. _Caution is the
parent of delicate beer-glasses._

Vrienden kost is haast gereed. _A friend’s dinner is soon dressed._

Vroeg gras, vroeg hooi. _Soon grass, soon hay._

Vroeg of laat komt de waarheid aan den dag. _Sooner or later the truth
comes to light._

Vroeg rijp, vroeg rot; vroeg wijs, vroeg zot. _Soon ripe, soon rotten;
soon wise, soon foolish._

Vroeg vuur, vroeg asch. _Soon fire, soon ashes._


W.

Waar de bije honig uit zuigt, zuigt de spin venijn uit. _Where the bee
sucks honey, the spider sucks poison._

Waar de dijk (of dam) het laagst is, loopt het water ’t eerst over.
_Where the dike (or dam) is lowest the water first runs over._

Waar de hegge het laagste is, wil elk er over. _Where the hedge is
lowest every one goes over._

Waar de vlijt de deur uit gaat, komt de armoede het venster in. _When
industry goes out of the door, poverty comes in at the window._

Waar men vruchtboomen zet valt niet op vruchten te rekenen. _He who
plants fruit-trees, must not count upon the fruit._

Waar niet is, verliest de keizer zijn regt. _Where there is nothing,
the emperor loses his right._

Wacht u voor een’ man met twee aangezigten. _Beware of the man of two
faces._

Wanneer de wijn is in de man, dan is de wijsheid in de kan. _When the
wine is in the man, the wit is in the can._

Wanneer dieven kijven bekomen vrome lieden hare goederen. _When thieves
fall out, honest men come to their goods._

Wanneer een boom ter aarde zijgt, maakt ieder dat hij takken krijgt.
_When the tree falls every one runs to cut boughs._

Wapenen, vrouwen, en boeken, behoeven dagelijksche behandeling. _Arms,
women, and books should be looked at daily._

Was, vlas, en tin; voor groot geld klein gewin. _Wax, flax, and tin;
much out and little in._

Wat de nuchtere denkt, dat spreekt de dronkaard. _What the sober man
thinks, the drunkard tells._

Wat de ouden zingen, piepen de ijongen. _The old ones sing, the young
ones pipe._ (Or, _As the old cock crows, the young cock learns._)

Water in eenen korf putten. _To put water into a basket._ (_To pour
water into a sieve._)

Water in de zee brengen. _To carry water to the sea._

Wat gij den armen geeft, leent gij den Heer. _He who giveth to the poor
lendeth to the Lord._

Wat het oog niet en ziet, dat begeert het herte niet. _What the eye
sees not, the heart craves not._

Wat horens heeft wil steken. _What has horns will gore._

Wat in ’t gebeente gegroeid is, wil uit het vleesch niet. _What is bred
in the bone won’t out of the flesh._

Wat niets en kost en deugd niet. _What costs nothing is worth nothing._

Wat u niet brand, dat koel niet. _That which burns thee not, cool not._

Wat van daag onregt is, is morgen geen regt. _What is wrong to-day
won’t be right to-morrow._

Weinig gezegd is haast verbeterd. _The less said the sooner mended._

Weinig houts veel vruchten. _Little wood, much fruit._

Weinig met eer, wat behoef je meer. _With honour and store, what would
you more._

Wel voorgaan doet wel volgen. _Good leading makes good following._

Werelds goed is eb en vloed. _Worldly good is ebb and flood._

Wie de roos wil plukken moet de doornen niet ontzien. _He who would
gather roses, must not fear thorns._

Wie een’ schalk wil vangen, moet achter de deur staan. _He who would
catch a rogue must watch behind the door._

Wie geen dorst heeft, wat doet hij bij de fontein. _Who has no thirst
has no business at the fountain._

Wie in zijn 23^e jaar niet sterft, in zijn 24^e niet verdrinkt, en
in zijn 25^e niet wordt verslagen, die mag wel spreken van goede
dagen. _He who dies not in his twenty-third year, drowns not in his
twenty-fourth, and is not slain in his twenty-fifth, may boast of good
days._

Wie is ’t die zonder op-spraak blijft, die voor de wereld spreekt of
schrijft? _Who can escape envy and blame, that speaks or writes for
public fame?_

Wie loopt, die wordt gejaagd. _Who runs is followed._

Wie op twee hazen te gelijk jaagt, vangt geen van beide. _He who hunts
two hares at once, catches neither._

Wie pepers te veel heeft die pepert zijne boonen. _Who has plenty of
pepper may pepper his beans._

Wie tegen wind spuwt, maakt zijn baard vuil. _Who spits against the
wind, fouls his beard._

Wie veeltijds spiegelen, zelden spinnen. _They who are often at the
looking-glass seldom spin._

Wie zich onder den draf mengt, dien eten de zwijnen. _He who mixes
himself with the draff will be eaten by the swine._

Wie zijn buren beledigt, maakt het zich zelven daarna zuur. _He who
slanders his neighbour makes a rod for himself._

Wie zijn kind straft, die heeft eere van hem; wie het niet straft, die
zal schande beleven. _Who chastises his child will be honoured by him,
who chastises him not will be shamed._

Wie zonder eten gaat te bed, dien wordt het slapen ligt belet. _Who
goes fasting to bed will sleep but lightly._

Wij appelen zwemmen, zei de paardenkeutel. _How we apples swim! said
the horse-t—d._

Wijsheid in mans, geduld in vrouwen, dat kan het huis in ruste houen.
_Wisdom in the man, patience in the wife, brings peace to the house,
and a happy life._

Wijst mij een’ leugenaar, en ik wijs u een’ dief. _Show me a liar, I’ll
show you a thief._

Wil men alle dingen met goede oogen aanzien dan moet men staâg door de
vingeren kijken. _Who would regard all things complacently must wink at
a great many._


Z.

Zaai geen geld op zee: ’t moet zinken. _Sow not money on the sea, lest
it sink._

Zacht gaan en verre zien. _Go softly and look afar._

Zachte meesters maken stinkende wonden. _Tender surgeons make foul
wounds._

Zachtzens en soergens gaat verre. _Soft and fair goeth far._

Zegt ons met wie dat gij verkeert, en heb ik uwen raad geleerd. _Tell
me the company you keep, and I’ll tell you what you are._

Zelfs lief niemands lief. _Self-love nobody else’s love_.

Zet u teeringe, na u neeringe. _Set thy expense according to thy trade._

Zich bij den neus laten leiden. _To be led by the nose._

Zij bijten niet al die haar tanden laten zien. _All do not bite that
show their teeth._

Zij leven te zamen als honden en katten. _They agree like cats and
dogs._

Zijn geld bekleed bij hem de plaats van wijsheid. _His money takes the
place of wisdom._

Zij steekt den bezem uit. _She hangs out the broom (wants a husband)._

Zij verstaan elkander als dieven op eene kermis. _They understand one
another like thieves in a fair._

Zij zijn niet allen gelijk die met den keizer rijden. _All are not
princes who ride with the emperor._

Zoo de gekken geen brood aten, het koren zogoed koop zijn. _If fools
ate no bread, corn would be cheap._

Zoo gewonnen, zoo geronnen. _So got, so gone._

Zoo gij een gek de vingers bied, ’t is vreemd neemt hij de vuisten
niet. _Offer a clown your finger, and he’ll take your fist._

Zoo gij zaait zoo zult gij maaien. _As you sow you shall reap._

Zoo pot, zoo deksel. _Like pot, like cover._

Zoo veel hoofden, zoo veel zinnen. _So many men, so many minds._

Zuinigheid is een groote rente. _Economy is a great revenue._

Zulk begin, zulk einde. _So begun, so done._

Zulke heer, zulke knecht. _Like master, like man._

Zware beurzen en ligte harten kunnen veel verzetten. _Heavy purses and
light hearts can sustain much._

Zweegen de dwazen zij waren wijs. _Were fools silent they would pass
for wise._

Zwijgen antwoordt veel. _Silence answers much._




DANISH PROVERBS.


A.

Aaret har en vid Mund og en stor Mave. _The year has a wide mouth and a
big belly._

Adam fik en Hak og Eva fik en Rok, deraf er al vor Adels-Flok. _Adam
got a hoe, and Eve got a spinning-wheel, and thence come all our
nobles._

Af Falsk og Svig vorder ingen riig. _Deceit and treachery make no man
rich._

Af Læp vorder Hund læderaadig. _By gnawing skin a dog learns to eat
leather._

Af liden Gnist kommer ofte stor Ild. _A large fire often comes from a
small spark._

Af Ögler komme Ögleunger. _Vipers breed vipers._

Af Skade bliver man klog, men sielden rig. _Damage suffered makes you
knowing, but seldom rich._

Af to onde Kaar skal man vælge det bedste. _Of two evils choose the
least._

Alderdom er ond Reisebroder. _Age is a sorry travelling companion._

Alderdom giör mangen hvidere, men ikke bedre. _Age makes many a man
whiter, but not better._

Aldrig er Fugl saa liden, söger jo eget Bo. _A bird may be ever so
small, it always seeks a nest of its own._

Aldrig er saa gammel en Kiærling, kommer der Ild i hende hun springer
jo. _A woman may be ever so old, if she takes fire she will jump._

Aldrig læges Saar saa vel, at Arret jo synes. _A wound never heals so
well that the scar cannot be seen._

Aldrig var færre Adel, end naar hver vil være det. _There were never
fewer nobles than when all would be so._

Alle Baader hiælpe, sagde Soen, hun greb et Myg. _Every little helps,
said the sow, when she snapped at a gnat._

Alle Nögle ere ei bundne ved en Kones Laar. _All keys hang not at one
woman’s girdle._

Alle Qvinder ere gode lutherske de prædike heller end de höre Messe.
_All women are good Lutherans, they would rather preach than hear mass._

Alle see hans bolde Arm, ingen seer hans slunkne Tarm. _Every one sees
his smart coat, no one sees his shrunken belly._

Alle ville længe leve, men Ingen vil gammel hedde. _All wish to live
long, but none to be called old._

Almisse tömmer ei Pung, og ei Messe Dagsfærd. _Alms do not empty the
purse, and a mass does not exhaust the day’s duty._

Alting har en Ende—uden Pölsen, den har to. _Everything has an
end—except a sausage, which has two._

Altid at spare, er altid at fattes. _Always to be sparing is always to
be in want._

Alt leer folsk Mand, naar Anden leer. _A fool laughs when others laugh._

Alt Vand vil til Strand, og Pengene til rig Mands Haand. _As water runs
towards the shore, so does money towards the rich man’s hand._

Alt voxer Rakketand, mens gammel Hund bider Been. _The teeth of the
puppy are growing, while the old dog is gnawing bones._

Alvor og Gammen kunne bedst sammen. _Earnestness and sport go well
together._

Anden Tid giver andet Folk. _Other times, other folk._

Arbeide har en bitter Rod, men söd Smag. _Labour has a bitter root, but
a sweet taste._

Arm er den Muus som kun har et Hul. _It is a poor mouse that has but
one hole._

Armod og Kiærlighed ere onde at dölge. _Love and poverty are hard to
conceal._

Arne Bande bider bedst. _The curse on the hearth wounds the deepest._

Arrig Quinde og bidsk Hund vogte Huset. _A cross-grained woman and a
snappish dog take care of the house._

At bede og smöre sinker ei at kiöre. _To bait and to grease does not
retard a journey._

At bie og lide, stiller mangen en Qvide. _To wait and be patient
soothes many a pang._

At sige Daaren Raad, det er som at slaae Vand paa en Gaas. _To give
counsel to a fool is like throwing water on a goose._

At skære i fremmed Öre er ikke anderledes end i Filtehat. _To cut into
another man’s ear is like cutting into a felt hat._

At tie Sandhed, er at begrave Guld. _To withhold truth is to bury gold._

At vide Lov og giöre Ret er tvende haande. _To know the law and do the
right are two things._

Ave er god naar hun kommer i Tide. _Correction is good when
administered in time._

Avind kommer ikke i öde Huus. _Envy does not enter an empty house._

Avindsyg er sin egen Böddel. _Envy is its own torturer._

Avind var aldrig god Talsmand. _Envy was never a good spokesman._

Ærlig Mand er ei disværre, at en Hund göer ad ham. _An honest man is
not the worse because a dog barks at him._


B.

Bag efter kommer tyndt Öl. _Small beer comes the last._

Bande bider ei Öie ud, uden Næven fölger med. _A curse will not strike
out an eye, unless the fist goes with it._

Bange Hierte vandt aldrig fager Mö. _Faint heart never won fair lady._

Barneryg vil böies i Tide. _A child’s back must be bent early._

Barn skal krybe til det lærer at gaae. _A child must creep until it
learns to walk._

Barne Sorg varer stakket. _A child’s sorrow is short-lived._

Bær Asenet en Guldsæk, det æder dog Tidsel. _Though the ass may carry a
sack of gold, it nevertheless feeds on thistles._

Beder Gud dig drage, han faaer dig vel Reb; beder han dig ride, han
faaer dig vel Hest. _If God bids thee draw, he will find thee a rope;
if he bids thee ride, he will find thee a horse._

Bedre Ægget i Dag end Hönen i Morgen. _Rather the egg to-day than the
hen to-morrow._

Bedre at Barn græder end at Moder sukker. _Better the child cry, than
the mother sigh._

Bedre at blæse hart end at brænde sig. _Better blow hard than burn
yourself._

Bedre at gaae en liden Krog end at væde sin Brog. _Better make a short
circuit than to wet your hose._

Bedre at komme seent til Kirke end aldrig. _Better come late to church
than never._

Bedre at spare paa Bredden, end paa Bunden. _Better spare at the brim
than at the bottom._

Bedre at være fri Fugl end fangen Konge. _Better to be a free bird than
a captive king._

Bedre brænder den vaade Green end den törre Steen. _The wet branch
burns better than the dry stone._

Bedre een Fugl i Haanden end to paa Taget. _One bird in the hand is
better than two on the roof._

Bedre en salt Sild over sit eget Bord, end en fersk Giedde over et
fremmed. _Better a salt herring on your own table, than a fresh pike on
another man’s._

Bedre er aaben Fjende end Hykle-Ven. _Better an open enemy than a false
friend._

Bedre er at Barn græder, end gammel Mand. _Better the child cry than
the old man._

Bedre er at gaae fri i en grön Eng, end at være bunden til en
Tornebusk. _Better walk unshackled in a green meadow, than be bound to
a thorn-bush._

Bedre er at lide for Sandhed, end at Lönnes for Lögn. _Better suffer
for truth, than prosper by falsehood._

Bedre er at stemme Bækken end Aaen. _It is easier to stem the brook
than the river._

Bedre er at tinge ved Busken end ved Boien. _It is better to make
conditions in the bush than in prison._

Bedre er at Verden veed du er en Synder end at Gud veed du er en
Hykler. _Better the world should know you as a sinner than God know you
as a hypocrite._

Bedre er Bröd end Fuglesang. _Bread is better than the song of birds._

Bedre er den Green der böier, end den der brister. _Better is the
branch that bends, than the branch that breaks._

Bedre er dyrt at kiöbe, end ilde at svelte. _It is better to buy dearly
than to hunger direly._

Bedre er een Ko med Ro end syv med Uro. _Better one cow in peace than
seven in trouble._

Bedre er et magert Forliig, end en fed Trætte. _A meagre compromise is
better than a fat lawsuit._

Bedre er et Ord for, end ti Ord efter. _One word beforehand is better
than ten afterwards._

Bedre er grov Traad, end bart Laar. _Better coarse cloth than naked
thighs._

Bedre er heelt end med Guld bödet. _Better whole than patched with
gold._

Bedre er Held end hundrede Mark. _Luck is better than a hundred marks._

Bedre er liden Nagle for Huus end slet ingen. _A small bolt to the
house is better than none at all._

Bedre er selv at have, end Söster at bede. _Better to have something
yourself, than to beg of your sister._

Bedre er snild Tunge, end kæmt Haar. _A smooth tongue is better than
smooth locks._

Bedre er strax at nægte, end længe at love. _Better to deny at once,
than to promise long._

Bedre er svang Hest end tom Grime. Bedre er halvt Bröd end Alt mist.
Bedre er lidet Boskab end tomt Huus. _Better a poor horse than an empty
stall. Better half a loaf than none at all. Better a little furniture
than an empty house._

Bedre er tiende Ord end tarvlös Tale. _Speaking silence is better than
senseless speech._

Bedre er tösser maalt, end eengang og galt. _Better twice measured than
once wrong._

Bedre er tyndt Öl end tom Tönde. _Better weak beer than an empty cask._

Bedre er Venne-Napp, end Fiende-Klap. _Better a friend’s bite than an
enemy’s caress._

Bedre i gammel Vogn end i nyt Skib. _Better in an old carriage than in
a new ship._

Bedre ingen Lov, end uden Fremgang. _Better no law, than law not
enforced._

Bedre lidt med Ro og Rette, end meget med Uro og Trætte. _Better a
little in peace and with right, than much with anxiety and strife._

Bedre noget paa Armen end alt i Tarmen. _Better something on the arm
than all in the stomach._

Bedre paa Træbeen at gaae, end paa Baar at bæres. _Better walk on
wooden legs, than be carried on a wooden bier._

Bedre sildig end aldrig. _Better late than never._

Bedst brænder Ild paa egen Arne. _The fire burns brightest on one’s own
hearth._

Bid byder anden. _One bite brings another._

Blind Due finder ogsaa stundom Hvedekorn. _A blind pigeon may sometimes
find a grain of wheat._

Blodet er aldrig saa tyndt, at det jo er tykkere end Vand. _Let the
blood be ever so thin, it is always thicker than water._

Blomster er Frugtens Fæstepenge. _Flowers are the pledges of fruit._

Bondens Fied giör Ageren fed. _The foot of the farmer manures the
field._

Bön er dyrest Kiöb. _What is got by begging is dearly bought._

Börn er fattig Mands Rigdom. _Children are the riches of the poor._

Börn er vis Sorg, men uvis Glæde. _Children are certain sorrow, but
uncertain joy._

Brændt Barn rædes gierne Ilden, og bidt Barn Hund. _A burnt child fears
the fire, and a bitten child fears a dog._

Bugen vil intet borge. _The belly gives no credit._


D.

Daare lader Raad gaae ind ad det ene Öre, og ud ad det andet. _Advice
to a fool goes in at one ear and out at the other._

Daarligt er at frygte det man ei kan flye. _It is folly to fear what
one cannot avoid._

Da begynde Svanerne at synge, naar Raagerne tie. _When the rooks are
silent the swans begin to sing._

Da er Ild god inde, naar Hunsegel hænger ude. _The fire is welcome
within, when icicles hang without._

Dagen er aldrig saa hellig at jo Gryden vil syde. _The day is never so
holy that the pot refuses to boil._

De ere ei alle Jægere, som blæse i Horn. _All are not hunters that blow
the horn._

De ere ikke alle gode Stegere som bær lange Knive. _All are not good
cooks who carry long knives._

De flye ei Alle, som vende Ryggen. _It is not all who turn their backs
that flee._

De gamle Stude har de stive Horn. _Old oxen have stiff horns._

De Gamle til Raad—de Unge til Daad. _The aged in council—the young in
action._

Deilig er Frugten som Dyden er i Træet. _As the virtue in the tree,
such is the fruit._

Deilighed bær Medgiften i Ansigtet. _Beauty carries its dower in its
face._

De lumske Sviin æde Masken, de galne löbe uden om. _The still swine eat
the mash, the wild ones run past it._

Den Bænk er vel prydet (som) med gode Qvinder er sat. _That bench is
well adorned that is filled with virtuous women._

Den Dag kommer vel, at Koen haver sin Hale behov. _The day is sure to
come when the cow will want her tail._

Den der er slaaet til en Skilling bliver aldrig Daler. _That which is
stamped a penny will never be a pound._

Den der har Glastag paa sit eget Huus, maa ikke kaste Steen paa andres.
_He who has a glass roof on his own house, must not throw stones at
others’._

Den der ikke sparer paa Skillingen, faaer aldrig Daleren. _He that does
not save pennies, will never have pounds._

Den der jager to Harer af een Busk, faaer sielden nogen af dem. _He who
hunts two hares from one bush, is not likely to catch either._

Den der tager en Enke med tre Börn, tager fire Tyve. _He who marries a
widow with three children, marries four thieves._

Den der venter paa död Mands Skoe, kommer længe til at gaae barfodet.
_He who waits for dead men’s shoes, may have to go long barefoot._

Den der vil have Hunden hængt, siger den bider Faar. _He that wants to
hang a dog, says that it bites the sheep._

Den Ene jager, den Anden æder Haren. _One hunts the hare, and another
eats it._

Den ene Ravn hugger ikke Öinene ud paa den Anden. _One raven does not
peck out another’s eyes._

Den ene Stodder lider ikke at den anden har to Poser. _One beggar likes
not that another has two wallets._

Den er en Giek sig selv roser, og en Gal sig selv vil laste. _He is a
fool that praises himself, and he a madman that speaks ill of himself._

Den er god at borge Byg som eier Havre. _It is safe to lend barley to
him who has oats._

Den er ilde skikket til Bager, der har et Hoved af Smör. _He is little
suited to be a baker, whose head is made of butter._

Den er ingen nyttig, som ei er sig selv nyttig. _He who is of no use to
himself, is of no use to any one._

Den er ingensteds som allesteds vil være. _He who would be everywhere
will be nowhere._

Den er let at lokke, som efter vil hoppe. _He is easy to lure, who is
ready to follow._

Den er Mand, som giör Mands Gierning. _He is a man, who acts like a
man._

Den er næst Gud som mindst behöver. _He is nearest to God who has the
fewest wants._

Den er Tingen næst, som har den i Hænder. _He is nearest a thing, who
has it in his hands._

Den er ung nok som er sund, og rig nok som er uden Gield. _He is young
enough who has health, and he is rich enough who has no debts._

Den er værd det Söde som har smagt det Suure. _He is worthy of sweets,
who has tasted bitters._

Den Fattige fattes meget, men den Gierrige alt. _The poor man wants
much, the miser everything._

Den fede So veed ei hvad den sultne lider. _The fat sow knows not what
the hungry sow suffers._

Den förste Fugl fanger det förste Korn. _The first bird gets the first
grain._

Den Gaas kiækker höit, der har en god Gasse. _The goose that has a good
gander cackles loudly._

Den Gaas kiækker ikke mere som Hovedet er af. _The goose that has lost
its head no longer cackles._

Den Gamle skal man ære, den Unge skal man lære. _Honour the old, teach
the young._

Den giemmer til Kat, som giemmer til Nat. _He who puts by for the
night, puts by for the cat._

Den glæder sig meest, som selv qvæder. _He that sings himself is the
best pleased._

Den har svært Löb, som nödes til at löbe. _He runs heavily who is
forced to run._

Den Hund man skal nöde til Skovs, beder ikke mange Dyr. _The dog that
is forced into the woods will not hunt many deer._

Den kan snarest spilde, som har Karret i Haand. _He is most likely to
spill who holds the vessel in his hand._

Den Kloges Arv findes i alle Lande. _A clever man’s inheritance is
found in every country._

Den Korset haver signer sig selv först. _He that bears the cross,
blesses himself first._

Den lade Dreng og den varme Seng kunne ei vel skilles ad. _A lazy boy
and a warm bed are difficult to part._

Den Lade faaer ingen Lön uden Last. _Blame is the lazy man’s wages._

Den leder ikke gierne bag Dören, som ei selv har staaet der. _A man
does not look behind the door unless he has stood there himself._

Den leer bedst som leer sidst. _He who laughs last, laughs best._

Den lever ikke i al Verden, som kan flaae Huden af en Qvadsteen. _He
does not live in this world that can skin a grindstone._

Den Milde giver sig rig, den Gierrige tager sig fattig. _The generous
man grows rich in giving, the miser poor in taking._

Den Penge man sparer er saa god som den man avler. _Money saved is as
good as money gained._

Den Pung er tom anden Mands Penge ligge udi. _That’s but an empty purse
which is full of other men’s money._

Den Qværnsteen maler og, der under ligger. _The millstone that lies
undermost also helps to grind._

Den raader for Hesten, der rider ham. _He who rides the horse is his
master._

Den ræddes at komme i Sæk, som för har været i. _He fears the sack who
has been in it._

Den sanker god Rigdom der varer sig for Skade. _He that keeps out of
harm’s way will gather goodly riches._

Den sene Ko faaer det sure Græs. _The laggard cow gets the sour grass._

Den sidder vel, som kan selv reise sig. _He sits well who can rise
without help._

Den skal ei være vaanden ad Svar, som giver andre onde Ord. _He who
abuses others must not be particular about the answer he gets._

Den skal endnu födes, der kan befalde alle. _He is not yet born who can
please everybody._

Den skal have en lang Skee, der vil söbe af Fad med Fanden. _He needs a
long spoon that would eat out of the same dish with the devil._

Den skal have meget Meel der vil stoppe alle Munde. _He must have much
meal who would stop all mouths._

Den skal have rene Fingre som en andens Næse vil snyde. _He must have
clean fingers who would blow another’s nose._

Den skal see ilde ud, som skal kyse Fanden. _He must be ill-favoured
who scares the devil._

Den skal sig selv love, der haver onde Grander. _He who has bad
neighbours is fain to praise himself._

Den skal staae paa et höit Bierg, der skal see sin Skiebne til Ende.
_He must stand high that would see the end of his own destiny._

Den skal staae tidlig op, der vil giöre alle tilpas. _He had need rise
betimes who would please everybody._

Den skal være en klog Vært, som vil tage Fanden i Herberge. _He must be
a clever host that would take the devil into his hostelry._

Den som ei vil lyde Fader, faaer vel at lyde Stivfader. _He who will
not obey father, will have to obey stepfather._

Den som er bidt af en Snog er bange for en Aal. _He who has been bitten
by a snake is afraid of an eel._

Den som Hönen föder, bör at have Ægget. _He who feeds the hen ought to
have the egg._

Den som kaster sig selv under Bænken, den lader de andre nok ligge.
_He who throws himself under the bench will be left to lie there._

Den som siger hvad han vil, maa höre hvad han ikke vil. _He who says
what he likes, must hear what he does not like._

Den som skal æde af en Andens Haand, bliver sielden mæt. _He who is fed
by another’s hand seldom gets enough._

Den som vel kan tigge, kan lade sine Penge ligge. _He who knows how to
beg may leave his money at home._

Den som vil gienne en anden over tre Gierder, maa selv over de to. _He
who would drive another over three dikes must climb over two himself._

Den Steen bliver eengang vaad, som Hvermand spytter paa. _The stone
that everybody spits upon will be wet at last._

Den Steen der ofte flyttes, bliver ikke mossegroet. _The oft moved
stone gathers no moss._

Den sviges værst, som sviger sig selv. _He is most cheated who cheats
himself._

Den taber ei i Trætte, som tvinger sin Tunge. _He loses least in a
quarrel who keeps his tongue in check._

Den veed bedst hvor Skoen trykker, som har den paa. _He knows best
where the shoe pinches who wears it._

Den Vei er ond at kiende, som Skibet löber i Havet. _It is hard to
track the path the ship follows in the ocean._

Der ere tre onde Naboer: store Floder, store Herrer, og Alfarvei.
_There are three bad neighbours: great rivers, great lords, and great
roads._

Der er haardt i Stivmoders Haand. _A stepmother has a hard hand._

Der er ikke saa liden Fisk, han stunder jo til at blive en Hval. _Every
little fish expects to become a whale._

Der er ingen Ild som jo haver nogen Smög. _There is no fire without
smoke._

Der er ingen Lægedom mod Bagvadskers Bid. _There is no cure against a
slanderer’s bite._

Der er mange Dage i Aaret, og end flere Maaltider. _There are many days
in the year, and still more meals._

Der er Raad mod Alt, uden mod Döden. _There is help for everything,
except death._

Der gaae mange Ord i en Sæk. _It takes many words to fill a sack._

Der hörer Lykke til at fange Harer med Tromme. _You must have good luck
to catch hares with a drum._

Der hörer mere til Dands end et Par Kork Skoe. _A pair of light shoes
is not all that is needed for dancing._

Der hörer Styrke til at drage om Reb med sin Overmand. _You must be
strong to pull a rope against a stronger._

Der hvor Forstanden slipper, tager Lykken ved. _When wisdom fails, luck
helps._

Der hvor Lov slipper bör Hæder at möde. _Where law lacks, honour should
eke it out._

Der kommer ingen Klogskab ud, hvor ingen er inde. _Where there is no
wit within no wit will come out._

Der kommer ofte Ild i Spotterens Huus. _The scoffer’s own house is
often on fire._

Der löber meget Vand i Dammen, medens Mölleren sover. _Much water runs
by while the miller sleeps._

Der skal ædes, vare end alle Træer Galger. _People must eat, even were
every tree a gallows._

Der skal en höi Muur til at holde Frygten ude. _It needs a high wall to
keep out fear._

Der skal være mange Muus om at bide en Kat. _It takes a good many mice
to kill a cat._

Dersom Hönen ikke kaglede, vidste man ikke hvad hun havde giort. _If
the hen did not cackle no one would know what she had been about._

Dersom Skiægget gialdt, kunde Giedebukken præke. _If the beard were
all, the goat might preach._

Der vil let Hu til tung Skiæbne. _It needs a light spirit to bear a
heavy fate._

Der vil Salt til at drysse Sandhed med, om hun ellers skal ned. _Truth
must be seasoned to make it palatable._

Der vil skarp Lud til skurvet Hoved. _A scald head needs strong lye._

Desmere man rörer ved Skarn desværre lugter det. _The more you stir
filth the worse it stinks._

De sove ikke alle der snive og snarke. _All who snore are not asleep._

Det Barn der faaer Stivmoder faaer ogsaa Stivfader. _The child who gets
a stepmother also gets a stepfather._

Det bedste Giödsel sidder under Bondens Sko. _The best manure is under
the farmer’s shoe._

Det bliver vel Dag om end Hanen ei galer. _Daylight will come, though
the cock do not crow._

Det den Ædru har i Hiertet, har den Drukne i Munden. _What the sober
man has in his heart, the drunken man has on his lips._

Det dig ikke brænder, behöver du ei at blæse paa. _There is no need to
blow what does not burn you._

Det duer ikke for Svanen, at lære Örneunger at synge. _It is not for
the swan to teach eaglets to sing._

Det duer til intet at gjöre Skoe til Gæs. _It is of no use making shoes
for geese._

Det ene Sværd holder det andet i Skeden. _One sword keeps another in
the scabbard._

Det er bedre at möde vred Mand end fastende. _Better cross an angry man
than a fasting man._

Det er bedre at see ved Ord end ved Hugg. _Better be convinced by words
than by blows._

Det er bedre at spörge to Gange, end at fare vild en Gang. _Better ask
twice than lose your way once._

Det er daarligt at drukne paa tört Land. _It is folly to drown on dry
land._

Det er daarligt at synge to Viser for den Döve. _It is folly to sing
twice to a deaf man._

Det er daarligt at tage Tornen af en Andens Fod og sætte den i sin
egen. _It is folly to take a thorn out of another’s foot and put it
into your own._

Det er dit som ingen kan tage fra dig. _You may call that your own
which no one can take from you._

Det er dyrt Smör som slikkes af en Hegle. _It is dearbought butter that
is licked off a woolcomb._

Det er ei alt Guld som glimrer. _It is not all gold that glitters._

Det er ei Alt i Mave godt (som) i Mund södt er. _What is sweet in the
mouth is not always good in the stomach._

Det er ei Börneværk naar Kiærling dandser. _It is no child’s play when
an old woman dances._

Det er ei for Koens Bedste, at hun kommer op at age. _It is not for the
good of the cow when she is driven in a carriage._

Det er ei hvert Slags Træ som duer til Træskoe. _Not every wood will
make wooden shoes._

Det er ei hvert Sviin Kragen vil ride. _It is not every hog that the
crow will ride._

Det er en arm Steg, som intet drypper af. _It is a poor roast that
gives no dripping._

Det er en dristig Muus der giör Rede i Kattens Öre. _It is a bold mouse
that makes her nest in the cat’s ear._

Det er en fattig Roes, man skal laane af Forfædre. _Praise borrowed
from ancestors is but very sorry praise._

Det er en lad Fugl, der ei gider bygge sin egen Rede. _It is a lazy
bird that will not build its own nest._

Det er en ond Brönd som man skal bære Vand udi. _It is a bad well that
needs water to be carried to it._

Det er en ond Haand, der ei vil sit Hoved værge. _It is a bad hand that
refuses to guard the head._

Det er en ond Hest som ikke er Havren værd. _It is a poor horse that is
not worth its oats._

Det er en ond Hielp, at hielpe een fra Dynen i Halmen. _That is poor
help that helps you from the feather-bed to the straw._

Det er en ond Skade som kommer ingen til Gavn. _It is an ill turn that
does no good to any one._

Det er en ond Smed der ræddes for Gnister. _He is a poor Smith who is
afraid of sparks._

Det er en ringe Aarsag, hvorfor Ulven æder Faaret. _It needs but slight
provocation to make the wolf devour the lamb._

Det er en slem Höne, der giör Æg uden Gaarde. _It is a bad hen that
lays her eggs away from the farm._

Det er et klogt Barn der kiender sin egen Fader. _It is a wise child
that knows its own father._

Det er farligt at æde Kirsebær med store Herrer, de kaste een Stenene
i Hovedet. _It is dangerous to eat cherries with the great, they throw
the stones at your head._

Det er for sildigt at raabe Kat, naar Flæsket er ædt. _It is too late
to cry cat, when the bacon is eaten._

Det er for sildigt at skyde Brönden igien naar Barnet er druknet. _It
is too late to cover the well when the child is drowned._

Det er for sildigt at slaae Vand paa Asken, naar Huset er brændt. _It
is too late to throw water on the cinders when the house is burnt down._

“Det er godt at gjöre med god Rede,” sagde Fanden, han redede sin
Moders Haar med en Möghakke. _”It is easy to work with a good comb,”
said the devil, when he combed his mother’s hair with a pitchfork._

Det er godt at laane Gud og Ageren, de give gode Renter. _It is good to
lend to God and to the soil—they pay good interest._

Det er godt at raade naar Lykken er med. _It is easy to manage when
fortune favours._

Det er godt at sove paa heelt Skind. _It is good to sleep on a whole
skin._

Det er godt at stange under anden Mands Blus. _It is easy to poke
another man’s fire._

Det er godt at svömme, naar en anden holder Hovedet op. _It is easy to
swim, when another holds up your head._

Det er godt at være kostfri af en andens Pung. _It is easy to be
generous out of another man’s purse._

Det er godt at være Præst om Paaske, Barn om Faste, Bonde om Juul, Föl
om Hösten. _It is good to be priest at Easter, child in Lent, peasant
at Christmas, and foal in harvest-time._

Det er haard Kost at æde sine egne Ord. _It is bitter fare to eat one’s
own words._

Det er ikke enhver som veed at tage den rette So ved Öret. _It is not
every one who takes the right sow by the ear._

Det er ikke for ingenting naar Fanden lægger sig i Gröften. _It is not
for nothing that the devil lays himself down in the ditch._

Det er ikke godt at kiende sit Smör i en andens Kaal. _It is not easy
to know your butter in another man’s cabbage._

Det er ikke godt at skride paa Fandens Iis. _It is not easy to walk
upon the devil’s ice._

Det er ikke godt at stinge Biörn med Skiev. _It is not easy to sting a
bear with a straw._

Det er ikke hver Mand der kan bære Hög paa Haand. _It is not every man
that can carry a falcon on his hand._

Det er ikke lang Vei til Vennehuus. _To a friend’s house the road is
never long._

Det er ilde for Hönen, naar Ægget vil lære hende at kagle. _The hen is
ill off when the egg teaches her how to cackle._

Det er ingen liden Skalk der kiender en stor. _He is no small knave who
knows a great one._

Det er Konst at lee, naar det gaaer een selv ilde. _It is a great art
to laugh at your own misfortunes._

Det er let at byde Fanden til Gjæst, men ondt at faae ham af Huset. _It
is easy to bid the devil be your guest, but difficult to get rid of
him._

Det er let at krybe i Træ naar det er fældet. _It is easy to stride a
tree when it is down._

Det er let at lægge Riis til, naar en anden lægger Rumpen til. _It is
easy to find the rod when another finds the bottom._

Det er lige nær til Himmels, i hvor man döer. _The road to heaven is
equally short, where’er we die._

Det er ondt at faae mange Hoveder under een Hat. _It is difficult to
get many heads under one hat._

Det er ondt at gabe mod en Ovns Mund. _It is useless to gape against an
oven._

Det er ondt at giöre Ild paa kold Arne. _It is hard to make a fire on a
cold hearth._

Det er ondt at lære gammel Hund at kure. _It is hard to teach an old
dog tricks._

Det er ondt at lokke Höge med tomme Hænder. _It is hard to lure hawks
with empty hands._

Det er ondt at plukke Haar af den Skaldede. _It is not easy to pluck
hairs from a bald pate._

Det er ondt at sidde imellem to Ilde. _It is bad to be between two
fires._

Det er ondt at skiule det hver Mand veed. _It is difficult to hide what
everybody knows._

Det er ondt at spytte Honning for den som har Munden fuld af Galde. _It
is difficult to spit honey out of a mouth full of gall._

Det er ondt at vogte den Höne som borte vil værpe. _It is not easy to
guard the hen that lays her eggs abroad._

Det er ondt Faar der ei gider baaret sit eget Fæt. _It is a bad sheep
that is too lazy to carry its own fleece._

Det er ondt Jern, som ikke er Staal udi. _It is bad iron in which there
is no steel._

Det er saa godt at ligge nögen som intet at have paa sig. _It is as
well to be naked as to have no covering._

Det er saa ondt at spytte Ilden ud og skiende sig, som at synke den og
brænde sig. _It is as bad to spit out the fire and be shamed, as it is
to swallow it and be burnt._

Det er Sæd at Börn giöre Börne-Gierning. _From children you must expect
childish acts._

Det er strengt at trælle med tom Tarm. _It is hard to labour with an
empty belly._

Det er ringe Tröst for Beenbrud, at en anden har brudt Halsen. _It is
poor comfort for one who has broken his leg, that another has broken
his neck._

Det er Tid at tage Hatten af, naar man seer Manden. _It is time enough
to take off your hat when you see the man._

Det förste Raad af en Qvinde er det bedste. _A woman’s first counsel is
the best._

Det giöres ei Behov at blæse ad den Ild som selv brænder. _There is no
use in blowing a fire that burns well._

Det har blæst haardt—Skarnet er flöiet op i Höisædet. _It has been
blowing hard—the dirt has been blown into high places._

Det hjælper ei at dölge for Ven det Uven veed. _It is no use hiding
from a friend what is known to an enemy._

Det höieste Bierg at komme over er Dörtærskelen. _The most difficult
mountain to cross is the threshold._

Det kan snart skee, som længe maa angres. _That may be soon done, which
brings long repentance._

“Det kommer igien,” sagde Manden, han gav sin So Flæsk. _”It will come
back,” said the man, when he gave his sow pork._

Det kommer op i Tö (som) man fjæler i Snö. _Thaw reveals what has been
hidden by snow._

Det kommer vel der skee skal. _That which must be, will be._

Det Korn vorder ilde malet, som bæres paa en ond Qværn. _The corn that
is taken to a bad mill, will be badly ground._

Det man adlyster kommer ikke far snart. _A pleasant thing never comes
too soon._

Det man æder af Gryden, faaer man ikke paa Fadet. _That which has been
eaten out of the pot cannot be put into the dish._

Det man lærer med Skade, husker man længe. _What you learn to your cost
you remember long._

Det Ord som er talt, sletter man ikke ud med en Svamp. _Words once
spoken cannot be wiped out with a sponge._

Det qvemmer bedre at skrabe Osten end skrælde den. _It is better to
scrape the cheese than to peel it._

Det Saar man ei kan hele, skal man ei rive op. _If you cannot heal the
wound, do not tear it open._

Det skal aarle kröge, som god Krog skal vorde. _The branch must be bent
early that is to make a good crook._

Det skal være en haard Vinter, om den ene Ulv æder den anden. _It must
be a hard winter when one wolf devours another._

Det som er taugt kan siges; det som er sagt kan ei ties. _That which is
unsaid, may be spoken; that which is said, cannot be unsaid._

Det sömmer ikke Spurv at gaae i Tranedands. _It does not become the
sparrow to mix in the dance of the cranes._

Det spörger en Blind om, hvorfor den elskes som er smuk. _It is only
the blind who ask why they are loved who are fair._

Det staaer ikke til Hunde, naar Hors skal döe. _It does not depend upon
the dog when the horse shall die._

Det stille Vand har den dybe Grund. _Still water runs deep._

Det Ung nemmer, Gammel ei glemmer. _What youth learns, age does not
forget._

De Unge skal man lære, de Gamle skal man ære. _Young people must be
taught, old ones be honoured._

Det var Lyst at age, skulde man ikke vælte. _It is pleasant driving
when there is no danger of upsetting._

Döden blæser ei Lyd for sig. _Death does not blow a trumpet._

Dören lukkes haardt i Laas for sandför Mand. _A truthteller finds the
doors closed against him._

Dristig Mand har Lykken i sit Fölge. _A bold man has luck in his train._

Drukken Mand kan snart komme op at dandse. _A drunken man may soon be
made to dance._

Drukken Mands Glæde er tidt ædru Mands Sorg. _The drunken man’s joy is
often the sober man’s sorrow._

Du har nok af Munden og lidt af Ulden, sagde Fanden, han klippede en
So. _Much noise and little wool, said the devil, when he was shearing
the sow._

Duk dig, lad gaae over; Veiret vil have sin Villie. _Stoop, and let it
pass; the storm will have its way._

Dyden i Midten, sagde Fanden, han sad imellem to Procuratorer. _Virtue
in the middle, said the Devil, when seated between two lawyers._


E.

Eed og Æg ere snart brudte. _Eggs and oaths are easily broken._

Een er ikke ond fordi en anden er god. _One man is not bad because
another is good._

Een er skabt til Pengene, den Anden til Pungen. _One man is born to the
money, and another to the purse._

Een Fjende er for meget, og hundrede Venner ere ei nok. _One enemy is
too much, and a hundred friends are not enough._

Een Haand fuld af Penge, er stærkere end to Hænder fulde af Sandhed.
_One hand full of money is stronger than two hands full of truth._

Een imod een, og to imod Fanden. _One to one, and two to the devil._

Een Nar giör flere. _One fool makes many._

Een plöier, en Anden saaer, den Tredie veed ei hvo det faaer. _One
ploughs, another sows, who will reap no one knows._

Een Skalk skal man fange med en anden. _Set a thief to catch a thief._

Een Skilling er bedre paa Land, end ti paa Havet. _One penny is better
on land than ten on the sea._

Een snakker tidt den anden af Bænken, og sætter sig selv op. _One man
often talks another off his bench, and seats himself upon it._

Een Svale giör ingen Sommer. _One swallow don’t make a summer._

Eet godt Raad er bedre end en Pose fuld. _One piece of good advice is
better than a bag full._

Eet Haar efter andet, gjör Bonden skaldet. _Hair by hair, and the head
gets bald._

Eet Jomfru Haar drager stærkere end ti Par Öxen. _One hair of a
maiden’s head pulls harder than ten yoke of oxen._

Eet skabet Faar fordærver en heel Flok. _One mangy sheep spoils a whole
flock._

Efter en god Avler kommer en god Oder. _After one that earns comes one
that wastes._

Efter god Mad og from Hustru töver man ei for længe. _For a good dinner
and a gentle wife you can afford to wait._

Efter söd Klöe kommer suur Svie. _After pleasant scratching comes
unpleasant smarting._

Egen Arne er Guld værd. _A hearth of your own is worth gold._

Egen Arne koger bedst. _The pot boils best on your own hearth._

Elsk mig lidt og elsk mig længe. _Love me little and love me long._

En Ambolt er ikke ræd for en god Forhammer. _The anvil does not fear a
good sledge-hammer._

En andens Hest og egen Svöbe, kan meget taale. _Another man’s horse and
your own whip can do a great deal._

En Bonde bliver Bonde, sov han end paa Silkebolster. _A boor remains a
boor, though he sleep on silken bolsters._

En döv Hörer giör en galen Svarer. _A deaf auditor makes a crazy
answerer._

En döv Sax giör en skievmundet Skrædder. _Dull scissors make
crooked-mouthed tailors._

End vinder folsk Mand förste Leg. _A fool only wins the first game._

Ene i Raad, ene i Sorg. _Alone in counsel, alone in sorrow._

En Fisk og en Gjæst lugter ilde den tredie Dag. _Fish and guests smell
at three days old._

En Gaas drikker saa meget som en Gasse. _A goose drinks as much as a
gander._

En god Dag skal man rose om Aftenen. _Praise a fair day in the evening._

En grön Juul giver en fed Kirkegaard. _A green Christmas makes a fat
churchyard._

Enhver bær sin Fjende i egen Barm. _Every man carries an enemy in his
own bosom._

Enhver Dag har sin Aften. _Every day has its evening._

Enhver er sin Lykkes Smed. _Every man is the architect of his own
fortune._

Enhver faaer at bære sin egen Sæk til Mölle. _Let every man carry his
own sack to the mill._

Enhver Fugl har sine Fieder behov. _Every bird needs its own feathers._

Enhver Fugl synger af sit Næb. _Let every bird sing its own note._

Enhver mener hans Kobber er Guld. _Every man thinks his copper is gold._

Enhver Tosse mener, han er klog nok. _Every fool thinks he is clever
enough._

Enhver vil gjerne over Gierdet hvor det er lavest. _Every one tries to
cross the fence where it is lowest._

Enhver vil rage Ild ad sin Gryde. _Every one rakes the fire under his
own pot._

Enhver Vind er læk Skib imod. _Every wind is against a leaky ship._

En liden Ild at varme sig paa, er bedre end en stor at brænde sig paa.
_A small fire that warms you, is better than a large one that burns
you._

En Nar kan spörge meer end ti Vise kunne svare til. _One fool may ask
more questions than ten wise men can answer._

En ond Hest æder saa meget som en god. _A bad horse eats as much as a
good one._

En ond Mund skal lave sig paa en stærk Ryg. _A foul mouth must be
provided with a strong back._

En Skalk kan vel skiules under en Messesærk. _There’s many a knave
concealed under a surplice._

En Skilling er i Tide saa god som en Daler. _A penny in time is as good
as a dollar._

En So kan saa vel finde et Agern, som en Galt. _A sow may find an acorn
as well as a hog._

En Spurv har saa ondt af at bryde sit Laar, som en Friis Hest. _A
sparrow suffers as much when it breaks its leg as does a Flanders
horse._

En villig Hielper töver ei til man beder. _A willing helper does not
wait until he is asked._

Er Fuglen af Haanden er den ond at faae tilbage. _The bird once out of
hand is hard to recover._

Et andet Aar kommer der en anden Juleaften. _Another year will bring
another Christmas.___

Ethvert Kar maa staa paa sin egen Bund. _Every tub must stand on its
own bottom._

Et lidet Muln kan skiule baade Sol og Maane. _A small cloud may hide
both sun and moon._

Et skabet Faar fordærver den hele Hjord. _One scabbed sheep will mar a
whole flock._


F.

Faaer man ei Fuglen, da faaer man vel en Fieder deraf. _If you cannot
get the bird, get one of its feathers._

Faa have Lykken, alle have Döden. _Few have luck, all have death._

Faa Qvinder graaner for Mandens Död. _Few women turn grey because their
husband dies._

Faar som bræge meest, malke mindst. _The sheep that bleat the most give
the least milk._

Fader og Moder ere gode, end er Gud bedre. _Father and mother are kind,
but God is kinder._

Fagerhed uden Tugt—Rose uden Lugt. _Beauty without virtue is like a
rose without scent._

Fagert Ansigt faaer Lov nok, dog man selv tier stille. _A fair face
will get its praise, though the owner keep silent._

Fagre Börn qvæde fagre Viser. _Pretty children sing pretty songs._

Fagre Ord fryde en Daare, og stundom fuldvis en Mand. _Fair words
please the fool, and sometimes the wise._

Fagre Ord uden Fynd naae ikke langt. _Fine words without deeds go not
far._

Falder Himlen ned, da briste mange Leergryder. _Should the heavens
fall, many pipkins will be broken._

Falskhed ligger ofte under fagert Haar. _Falseness often lurks beneath
fair hair._

Fattige Frænder faae liden Hæder. _Poor relations have little honour._

Fattig Mand har faa Kyndinger. _A poor man has few acquaintances._

Fattig Mands Hovmod varer stakket. _The pride of the poor does not
endure._

Fattig Mands Kæde haver mange Ulæde. _A poor man’s joy has much alloy._

Fattig Mands Korn voxer altid tyndt. _The poor man’s corn always grows
thin._

Fattig Mand söger om Maden, den Rige om Lyst til at æde den. _The poor
man seeks for food, the rich man for appetite._

Far som de Fleste, saa spotte dig de Færreste. _Do as others do, and
few will mock you._

Flere Folk dræbes af Nadver end af Sværd. _More people are slain by
suppers than by the sword._

Flykket hænger ikke saa höit, at jo Hunden agter sig Benet. _The flitch
hangs never so high but a dog will look out for the bone._

Flyver end Fuglen over dit Hoved, saa lad den ei bygge Bo i dit Haar.
_Though the bird may fly over your head, let it not make its nest in
your hair._

Föl bliver ikke altid Faderen liig. _Every foal is not like its sire._

Folsk Vise vorder mangelunde qvædet. _A silly song may be sung in many
ways._

Fordi er Verden vid, at hver haver sin Id. _Every man has his lot, and
a wide world before him._

För een lærer at hænge er han halv död. _Before a man learns to hang he
is half dead._

Forgieves er at mede uden Krog, at lære uden Bog. _It is vain to fish
without a hook, or learn to read without a book._

For Konst skal man Mesteren ære. _The master derives honour from his
art._

Forliigt Venskab er som ilde lægt Saar. _Reconciled friendship is like
a badly healed wound._

For meget og for lidt fordærver alting. _Too little and too much spoils
everything._

For Vilkaar og Vedtægt maa Loven vige. _To circumstances and custom the
law must yield._

“Frænde er Usle værst,” sagde Ræven, han saae de röde Hunde. _”Own kin
are the worst friends,” said the fox, when he saw the foxy dogs after
him._

Freden föder, Krigen öder; Freden nærer, Krigen tærer. _Peace feeds,
war wastes; peace breeds, war consumes._

Fred og velbygget Huus kjöbes ei for dyrt. _Peace and a well-built
house cannot be bought too dearly._

Fred skal man dyrt kjöbe. _Peace must be bought even at a high price._

Fremmed Mad smager altid bedst. _Strangers’ meat is the greatest treat._

Frisk vovet er halvt vundet. _A bold attempt is half success._

“Fruer har Fruenoder,” sagde Gal’ Ane, hun slæbte sin Kaabe i
Rendesteenen. _”Ladies have ladies’ whims,” said crazy Ann, when she
draggled her cloak in the gutter._

Fuglen flyver aldrig saa höit, han söger jo sit Föde paa Jorden.
_However high a bird may soar, it seeks its food on earth._

Fuldt Kar skal man varligen bære. _A full vessel must be carried
carefully._

“Fy dig an, saa sort du er!” sagde Gryden til Leerpotten. _”Fie upon
thee, how black thou art!” said the kettle to the saucepan._

Fyrm og Faste læger mangen Sot. _Abstinence and fasting cure many a
complaint._


G.

Gaaer Lykkens Vogn vel, da hænge Skam og Avind ved Hiulene. _When
fortune’s chariot rolls easily, envy and shame cling to the wheels._

Gaasen gaaer saa længe i Stegerset, til hun fastner ved Spedet. _The
goose goes so often into the kitchen, till at last she sticks to the
spit._

“Gak med,” og “see til,” ere to gode Tyende i Bondens Gaard. _”I’ll go
myself,” and “I’ll see to it,” are two good servants on a farm._

Galne Hunde faae revet Skind. _Mad dogs get their coats torn._

Gamle Fugle fanger man ikke med Avner. _Old birds are not caught with
chaff._

Gamle Mærker daare ikke. _Old signs do not deceive._

Gamle Sviin har haarde Tryner, gamle Stude haarde Horn. _Old swine have
hard snouts, old oxen hard horns._

Gammel Giek er værre end ung Daare. _An old fool is worse than a young
simpleton._

Gammel Green bryder naar den skal böies. _The old branch breaks when it
is bent._

Gammel Mands Sagn er sielden usand. _An old man’s sayings are seldom
untrue._

Gammel Ulv ræddes ei ved höie Raab. _An old wolf is not scared by loud
cries._

Gavnet er bedre end Navnet. _Profit is better than fame._

Giedden bliver stor af de smaae Fisk. _The pike grows big on small fry._

Giem din Mund, og giem din Ven. _Keep your mouth, and keep your friend._

Gien ei af dig det, der ei löber paa dig. _Drive not away what never
came near you._

Giensti vorder ofte Glapsti. _A short cut is often a wrong cut._

Gierrig Mands Taske bliver aldrig fuld. _The miser’s bag is never full._

Gierrig Qværn maler allehaande Korn. _A greedy mill grinds all kinds of
corn._

Giev Mand giör sig ikke til Hund for et Beens Skyld. _An honest man
does not make himself a dog for the sake of a bone._

Gift din Sön naar du vil, din Datter naar du kan. _Marry your son when
you will, your daughter when you can._

Giör ærligen, og svar diærveligen. _Act honestly, and answer boldly._

Giör saa i Dalen, at du frygter ei hvo staaer paa Valden. _Act so in
the valley, that you need not fear those who stand on the hill._

Giör vel imod en Skalk, og bed til Gud, han lönner dig ikke. _Do good
to a knave, and pray God he may not do the same to thee._

Giort Gierning staaer ikke til at vende. _What is done cannot be
undone._

Giver Gud ei Skiepper fulde, saa giver han Skeer fulde. _If God give
not bushelfuls, he gives spoonfuls._

Giv Griis naar han grynter, og Barn naar det græder, saa faaer Du fager
Griis og fuult Barn. _Give a pig when it grunts, and a child when it
cries, and you will have a fine pig, and a bad child._

Giv Skalken et Spand, han tager vel heel Alen. _Give a rogue an inch,
and he will take an ell._

Glad Aftensang giör ofte sorrigfuld Ottesang. _A joyous evening often
leads to a sorrowful morning._

Glæde er som Koldesygen; een god Dag imellem to onde. _Joy is like the
ague; one good day between two bad ones._

Gode Ord læge Venne-Saar. _Kind words heal friendship’s wounds._

Gode Raad rodne ikke, naar de komme törre i Huus. _Good counsel will
not rot, if it be got in dry._

God Konge er bedre end gammel Lov. _A good king is better than an old
law._

God Nabo er bedre end Broder i anden By. _A good neighbour is better
than a brother far off._

God Styrmand kiendes ei naar Havet er stille og Veiret til Villie. _A
good pilot is not known when the sea is calm and the weather fair._

Godt er at have reent Bröd i sin Pose. _It is well to have clean bread
in one’s wallet._

Godt er at hvile paa giort Gierning. _Rest is good after the work is
done._

Godt er at sidde ved Styret i stille Veir. _It is easy to sit at the
helm in fine weather._

Godt Haandværk har en gylden Grund. _A good handicraft has a golden
foundation._

Godt kommer aldrig for tidt. _Good never comes too often._

Gold So var aldrig Griise god. _A barren sow is never kind to pigs._

Graa Haar ere Dödens Blomster. _Grey hairs are death’s blossoms._

Gud bedre Faarene naar Ulven er Dommer. _God help the sheep when the
wolf is judge._

Gud giver alle Mad som han giver Mund. _God never sends mouths but he
sends meat._

Gud giver hver Fugl sin Föde, men kaster den ei i Reden til ham. _God
gives every bird its food, but does not throw it into the nest._

Gud giver hver saa Kuld, som Klæder. _God sends men cold according to
their clothes._

Gud giver smaa Folk smaa Gaver. _God gives little folks small gifts._

Gud giver Villien, Nöden giver Tvang. _God gives the will, necessity
gives the law._

Gud kommer tilsidst, naar vi troe han er længst borte. _God comes at
last, when we think he is farthest off._

Guds Raadkammer har ingen Nögle. _To God’s council-chamber there is no
key._

Guld bliver vel Guld, om end det ligger i Skalkepung. _Gold is gold,
though it be in a rogue’s purse._

Guld Nögle lukker alle Döre op uden Himlens. _A golden key opens every
door except that of heaven._

Gunst og Gave kommer Retten til at rave. _Favour and gifts disturb
justice._


H.

Haabe og vente er Giekkerente. _Hope and expectation are a fool’s
income._

Haabet er de Vaagendes Dröm. _Hope is the dream of the waking._

Haabet er et Æg hvoraf Een faaer Blommen, en Anden Hviden, en Tredie
Skallen. _Hope is an egg of which one man gets the yolk, another the
white, and a third the shell._

Haand skal anden toe, eller baade urene være. _One hand must wash the
other, or both will be dirty._

Haardt Bidsel giör ikke Hesten bedre. _A hard bit does not make the
horse better._

Haardt er ufödt Hest at binde ved Krybbe. _It is difficult to tie an
unborn horse to the manger._

Halvt at rose er halvt at skielde. _Faint praise is akin to abuse._

Han ager et godt Læs i Gaard, som en god Hustru faaer. _He drives a
good waggonful into his farm who gets a good wife._

Han ager ikke ilde som veed at vende. _He is not a bad driver who knows
how to turn._

Han banker dristig paa, som bær godt Budskab. _He knocks boldly at the
door who brings a welcome message._

Han dandser og, som dandser nödig. _A man dances all the same, though
he may dance against his will._

Han drukner ikke, der hænge skal, uden Vandet gaaer over Galgen. _He
who was born to be hanged will not be drowned, unless the water go over
the gallows._

Han er ikke bedre der fjæler, end han der stjæler. _He that hides is no
better than he that steals._

Han er ikke bedre der holder end den der flaaer. _He that holds is no
better than he that scourges._

Han er ingensteds, som er allesteds. _He who is everywhere, is nowhere._

Han föler bedst hvor Skoen trykker, som har den paa. _He knows best
where the shoe pinches who wears it._

Hæng den unge Tyv, saa stiæler den gamle ikke. _Hang the young thief,
and the old one will not steal._

Han kommer ei til Skov der ræddes for hver Busk. _He will never get
into the wood who starts at every bush._

Han kommer og frem, der ager med Stude. _Even he gets on who is drawn
by oxen._

Han kom tidlig nok, der blev hængt ved Lys. _He came time enough who
was hung by candlelight._

Han maae have Skaden, som har sögt den. _He that courts injury will
obtain it._

Han raader for Sækken, der sidder paa den. _He has command of the sack
who is seated on it._

Han skal have Fingre af Jern, som Fanden vil flaae. _He must have iron
fingers who would flay the devil._

Han skal have meget Smör, som skal stoppe hver Mands Mund. _He must
have plenty of butter, who would stop everybody’s mouth._

Han skal see grandt til, der Sanden skal sige. _He must keep a sharp
look-out who would speak the truth._

Han skal skrige höit, som vil skræmme Fanden. _He must cry loud who
would scare the devil._

Han skal være skiær som en anden vil skielde. _He must be pure who
would blame another._

Han skiender, som ei kan skade. _He scolds most that can hurt the
least._

Han veed bedst af Vandet, som vadet har. _He knows the water best who
has waded through it._

Har du lært at bie, kan du blive Dronning i Sverrig. _If you have
learnt to wait, you may be Queen of Sweden._

Har du sagt hvad du vil, skal du höre hvad du ikke vil. _He that says
what he should not, will hear what he would not._

Hævd giör god Hest og ikke höre Stalde. _Care, and not fine stables,
make a good horse._

Havde nær ikke været saa havde Kiærlingen bidt en Ulv. _Had it not been
for an if, the old woman would have bitten a wolf._

Heiren straffer Vandet, fordi han ei kan svömme. _The heron blames the
water because he cannot swim._

Hellere seer jeg Rögen af min egen Skorsteen, end Ilden paa en andens.
_I would rather see smoke from my own chimney than the fire on
another’s hearth._

Hemmelig Gave faaer aabenbar Lön. _Secret gifts are openly rewarded._

Herrebön er Herrebud. _Great men’s requests are commands._

Herrer og Narre have frit Sprog. _Lords and fools speak freely._

Herre uden Land, er Fadet uden Viin. _A lord without land, is like a
cask without wine._

Hest skal gaae til Krybben, ikke Krybben til Hest. _The horse must go
to the manger, and not the manger to the horse._

Hielp dig selv da hielper dig Gud. _Help yourself, and God will help
you._

Hielp er god, saa nær som i Grödfadet. _Help is good everywhere, except
in the porridge-bowl._

Himlen er dog blaa, om end den Blinde ei seer det. _The sky is not the
less blue because the blind man does not see it._

Hoflevnet er ofte Helvedes Gienvei. _Life at court is often a short cut
to hell._

Hold dig til de Smaae, saa bide de Store dig ikke. _Keep to the little
ones, and the big ones will not bite you._

Hold din Næse fra andres Gryder. _Keep your nose out of another’s mess._

Holder man ei Kieppen til, agter Hunden intet Bud. _It is the raised
stick that makes the dog obey._

Hör en Mand för du svarer; hör flere för du dömmer. _Hear one man
before you answer; hear several before you decide._

Hovedkulds Raad—halslös Gierning. _Precipitate counsel—perilous deed._

Hovmod gaaer for Fald. _Pride will have a fall._

Hvad man med Synd faaer, det med Sorg gaaer. _That which comes with
sin, goes with sorrow._

Hvad skal Spurve i Tranedands, deres Been ere saa korte. _Sparrows
should not dance with cranes, their legs are too short._

Hvem der hvidsker, han lyver. _He who whispers, lies._

Hvem der ikke seer sig for, maa tage Skade for Hiemgiæld. _He who does
not look before him, must take misfortune for his earnings._

Hvem der saaer Penge, höster Armod. _He who sows money, will reap
poverty._

Hvem der skammer sig ved at spörge, skammer sig ved at lære. _He who is
ashamed of asking, is ashamed of learning._

Hvem der vil hænge sig, finder nok en Strikke. _He who would hang
himself is sure to find a rope._

Hver er sin Synd söd og sin Anger led. _Every one finds sin sweet and
repentance bitter._

Hver hörer helst sin egen Lov. _Every man likes his own praise best._

Hver i sin Færd, som han er hjemme lært. _A man conducts himself abroad
as he has been taught at home._

Hver Mand siger det; ingen Mand veed det. _Everybody says it; nobody
knows it._

Hver Mand sin Lyst. _Every man has his liking._

Hvermands Ven, hvermands Nar. _Every man’s friend is every man’s fool._

Hver Ræv varer sin Bælg. _Every fox looks after his own skin._

Hver skal bære sin egen Sæk til Mölle. _Every man must carry his own
sack to the mill._

Hvert Liv sin Lyst, hver Lyst sin Lov. _Every life has its joy, every
joy its law._

Hvo aarle riis, han vorder mangt viis. _He who rises early will gather
wisdom._

Hvo alle tiene vil, faaer Tak af Ingen. _He who would serve everybody
gets thanks from nobody._

Hvo avelös lever, han ærelös döer. _He who lives without restraint,
will die without honour._

Hvo der ei har Penge i Pungen, maa have gode Ord paa Tungen. _He that
has no money in his purse, should have fair words on his lips._

Hvo der ei kan faae Flæsket, faaer at nöies med Kaalen. _He who can’t
get bacon, must be content with cabbage._

Hvo der ei vil til Helvede, kommer ikke til Hove. _He who would not go
to hell, must not go to court._

Hvo der er födt til Penning, bliver aldrig Dalers Herre. _He who was
born to pennies, will never be master of dollars._

Hvo der er langt fra sit Hjem, er næst ved sin Skade. _He who is far
from home, is near to harm._

Hvo der flyer, gjör sig selv sagfældig. _He who flees, proves himself
guilty._

Hvo der föder en Ulv, han styrker sin Fjende. _He who feeds a wolf,
strengthens his enemy._

Hvo der gaaer i Dands, see til hvem han tager i Haand. _When you go to
dance, take heed whom you take by the hand._

Hvo der gaaer i Seng med Hunde, skal staa op med Lopper. _He that lies
down with dogs, will get up with fleas._

Hvo der har mange Jern i Ilden, han faaer somme brændt. _He who has
many irons in the fire, will let some of them burn._

Hvo der haver en hvid Hest og deilig Kone, er sjelden uden Sorg. _He
who has a white horse and a fair wife is seldom without trouble._

Hvo der haver Giekken i Ærmet, der vil han alt kige ud. _If a man has
folly in his sleeve, it will be sure to peep out._

Hvo der hugger over sig, ham falder Spaanerne i Öinene. _He that cuts
above himself, will get splinters in his eye._

Hvo der ikke byger vel, han bleger ikke vel. _They who do not wash
well, do not bleach well._

Hvo der ikke har Falk, han skal bede med Ugler. _He who has no falcon,
must hunt with owls._

Hvo der ikke vil kjöbe Raad for godt Kjöb, skal kjöbe Anger dyret. _He
who will not take cheap advice, will have to buy dear repentance._

Hvo der jager med Katte, han fanger Muus. _He who hunts with cats will
catch mice._

Hvo der kan sidde paa en Steen og föde sig, skal ikke flytte. _He who
can sit upon a stone and feed himself should not move._

Hvo der kommer paa Söen, maa enten seile eller synke. _He that is once
at sea, must either sail or sink._

Hvo der omgaaes med Ulv, han lærer at tude. _He who herds with wolves,
learns to howl._

Hvo der saaer Ærter ved Adelvei, faaer ei alle Bælge i Laden. _He who
sows peas on the highway does not get all the pods into his barn._

Hvo der saaer Had, skal höste Anger. _He who sows hatred shall gather
rue._

Hvo der selv vil gjöre sig til Giek, faaer mange til at hjælpe sig. _He
who would make a fool of himself will find many to help him._

Hvo der slaaer een paa Halsen, han slaaer ham ikke langt fra Hovedet.
_He who strikes another on the neck, does not strike far from the head._

Hvo der staaer höit, den seer man vidt. _He who stands high is seen
from afar._

Hvo der staaer Vedhuggeren nær, faaer en Spaan i Hovedet. _He who
stands near the woodcutter is likely to be hit by a splinter._

Hvo der tager Barnet ved Haanden tager Moderen ved Hjertet. _He who
takes the child by the hand, takes the mother by the heart._

Hvo der vil æde Kjernen, faae bryde Skallen. _He who would eat the
kernel, must crack the shell._

Hvo der vil binde for en andens Mund, skal först snöre for sin egen.
_He who would close another man’s mouth, should first tie up his own._

Hvo der vil have god Kaal, faaer at koste den. _He who would have good
cabbage, must pay its price._

Hvo der vil have godt af Ilden maa taale Rögen. _He who would enjoy the
fire must bear the smoke._

Hvo der vil have Hunden hængt, finder nok et Reb. _He that wants to
hang a dog, is sure to find a rope._

Hvo der vil Honning slikke, maa ikke ræddes for Bier. _He who would
steal honey, must not be afraid of bees._

Hvo der vil kjöbe Pölse af Hunden maa give ham Flesk igjen. _He who
would buy sausage of a dog must give him bacon in exchange._

Hvo der vil smage al Saad, brænder tidt sin Mund. _He who tastes every
man’s broth, often burns his mouth._

Hvo en anden vil række en Brand, vare sig at han ei brænder sin Haand.
_Let him who would reach another a brand, beware that he do not burn
his own hand._

Hvo höit vil klyve, falder ofte ned. _Those who climb high, often have
a fall._

Hvo Kjærnen vil æde, skal Nödden bryde. _He who would eat the kernel,
must crack the nut._

Hvo kommer först til Mölle, faaer först malet. _He who comes first to
the mill is first served._

Hvo lidet forsmaaer, han bliver sjelden rig. _He who despises small
things seldom grows rich._

Hvo lidet saaer, lidet faaer. _He who sows little, reaps little._

Hvo meget haver af Smörret, han kaster somt i Kaalen. _He who has
plenty of butter, may put some in his cabbage._

Hvo meget spörger, bliver meget viis. _He that inquires much, learns
much._

Hvor Aadselet er, forsamles Örnene. _Where the carrion is, there the
eagles gather._

Hvor der er Ave er Tugt; hvor der er Fred er Frugt. _Where there is
discipline there is virtue; where there is peace there is plenty._

Hvor der er Hierterum, er der Huusrum. _When there is room in the
heart, there is room in the house._

Hvo ret vil spare, skal begynde af Munden. _He who would save, should
begin with the mouth._

Hvor Mand ei selv kommer, der bliver ei heller hans Hoved tvættet.
_Where a man never goes, there his head will never be washed._

Hvor man ei kan komme over, maa man krybe under. _Where you cannot
climb over, you must creep under._

Hvor Mistanke gaaer ind, gaaer Kjærlighed ud. _When mistrust enters,
love departs._

Hvor Penge fattes og Raad, er bedst, ikke at krige. _Where money and
counsel are wanting, it is best not to make war._

Hvor Villie er Ret, der er Loven landflygtig. _Where will is right, law
is banished._

Hvor Vrede blinder, der Sandhed forsvinder. _When anger blinds the
eyes, truth disappears._

Hvo sig blander med Saader, ham æde Sviin. _He who lies down in the
wash will be eaten by swine._

Hvo sig selv kildrer, kan lee naar han lyster. _He who tickles himself
can laugh when he pleases._

Hvo sig selv laster, ham lover ingen Mand. _He who speaks ill of
himself is praised by no one._

Hvo som bygger efter hver Mands Raad, hans Huus kommer kroget at staae.
_He who builds according to every man’s advice will have a crooked
house._

Hvo som har en god Nabo, har en god Morgen. _He who has a good
neighbour has a good morning._

Hvo som rædes for Ord, har ei Hierte til Gierning. _He who is scared by
words, has no heart for deeds._

Hvo som rörer ved Beg, han smitter sig. _He that touches pitch defiles
himself._

Hvo som Skalken kiender, han kiöber ham ei. _He who knows a knave,
makes no bid for him._

Hvo som Synden saaer skal höste Skam. _He who sows iniquity shall reap
shame._

Hvo som vil gjöre et stort Spring, skal gaae vel tilbage. _He who would
leap high must take a long run._

Hvo som vil hævne sig, skal vare sig. _He who would seek revenge must
be on his own guard._

Hvo som vil röre i Skarn, faaer og lugte det. _If you will stir up the
mire, you must bear the smell._

Hvo sorg elsker faaer altid noget at qvide. _He who loves sorrow, will
always find something to mourn over._

Hugg, saa falder Spaaner. _Chop, and you will have splinters._

Hunden bliver ei lös, om han end bider i Lænken. _The dog will not get
free by biting his chain._

Hund er Hund om han er aldrig saa broget. _A dog is a dog whatever his
colour._

Hundrede Vogne med Sorg betale ei en Haandfuld Gield. _A hundred
waggonsful of sorrow will not pay a handful of debt._

Hunger er det bedste Suul. _Hunger is the best sauce._

Hungrig Hund og törstig Hest passer ei om Hugg. _A hungry dog and a
thirsty horse take no heed of blows._

Hurtig til Hatten, og seen til Pungen, giör ingen Skade. _Put your hand
quickly to your hat, and slowly in your purse, and you will take no
harm._

Huusbonds Öie giör en fed Hest. _The eye of the master makes the horse
fat._


I.

Iæt har ingen Dyd uden det holdes. _There is no virtue in a promise
unless it be kept._

Idag Guld, imorgen Muld. _To-day in gold, to-morrow in the mould._

Idig Gierning giör duelig Mester. _Diligent work makes a skilful
workman._

I Krig er bedst at binde sin Hest ved fremmed Krybbe. _In war it is
best to tie your horse to a strange manger._

Ilde giemmer man Pölse i Hundehuus. _The dog’s kennel is not the place
to keep a sausage._

Ilden skrötter ikke, hvis Kappe den svier. _The fire heeds little whose
cloak it burns._

Ilde strider hovedlös Hær. _A headless army fights badly._

Ild Hund haver Ar i Næse. _An ill-tempered dog has a scarred nose._

Ild og Halm giör snar Lue. _Fire and straw soon make a flame._

Ild og Vand ere gode Tienere, men onde Herrer. _Fire and water are good
servants but bad masters._

Ild pröver Guld, og Nöd Vennehuld. _Gold is proved in the fire,
friendship in need._

Ildt er Rakke at lege med Biörnehvalp. _It is bad for puppies to play
with bear-cubs._

Ingen bliver greben paa det Sted, hvor han ikke kommer. _No one can be
caught in places he does not visit._

Ingen er mere döv end den som ikke vil höre. _None so deaf as those who
won’t hear._

Ingen er saa lang, han maa jo række sig, ingen saa liden han maa jo
bukke sig. _No man is so tall that he need never stretch, and none so
small that he need never stoop._

Ingen er saa riig, han har jo sin Grande nödig. _No one is rich enough
to do without his neighbour._

Ingen faaer Skam, uden han selv hielper til med. _Shame comes to no man
unless he himself help it on the way._

Ingen falder siidt, uden han vil stige höit. _No one falls low unless
he attempt to climb high._

Ingen halter af Andres Skade. _No man limps because another is hurt._

Ingen Helgen er saa ringe, han vil jo have sit Voxlys. _Let a saint be
ever so humble, he will have his wax taper._

Ingen kiender Præsten bedre end Degnen. _No one knows the parson better
than the clerk._

Ingen Ko kaldes broget, uden hun haver en Flek. _A cow is not called
dappled unless she has a spot._

Ingen kommer i Skaden, uden han selv hielper til. _No one gets into
trouble without his own help._

Ingen leder om en anden i Sækken, uden han selv har været der för. _No
man looks for another in a sack, unless he have been there himself._

Ingen skal foragte lidet Saar, fattig Frænde, eller ringe Fjende.
_Despise not a small wound, a poor kinsman, or a humble enemy._

Ingen Veibyrde er bedre at bære end Viisdom. _Wisdom is the least
burdensome travelling pack._

Intet er saa nyt, at jo för er skeet. _Nothing is so new but it has
happened before._ (_There is nothing new under the sun._)

Intet Svar er ogsaa Svar. _No answer is also an answer._

I stille Vand gaae de store Fiske. _In still water are the largest
fish._

I tyst Vand ere Orme værst. _In still water the worms are worst._


J.

“Jeg kiender nok Karsen,” sagde Bonden, han aad Skarntyde. _”I am a
judge of cresses,” said the peasant, as he was eating hemlock._

“Jeg siger det ikke for min Skyld,” sagde Ræven, “at der er god
Gaasegang i Skoven.” _”It is not for my own sake,” said the fox, “that
I say there is a good goose-green in the wood.”_

Jo ædlere Blod, jo mindre Hovmod. _The nobler the blood the less the
pride._

Jo argere Skalk, jo bedre Lykke. _The more knave, the better luck._

Jo flere Hyrder, jo værre Vogt. _The more shepherds the less care._

Jo flere Kokke, jo værre Spad. _The more cooks, the worse broth._

Jo kiærere Barn, jo skarpere Riis. _The dearer the child, the sharper
must be the rod._

Jo mere af Lov, jo mindre af Ret. _The more by law, the less by right._

Jo mere Frygt, jo nærmere Skaden. _The greater the fear, the nearer the
danger._

Jorden er altid frossen for utrevne Sviin. _The earth is always frozen
to lazy swine._


K.

Kald ikke paa Fanden, han kommer vel ubuden. _Call not the devil, he
will come fast enough unbidden._

Kappen giör hverken Præst eller Degn. _It is not the surplice that
makes parson or clerk._

Kast ei Bulöxe til Vor Herre, han vender det skarpe igien. _Throw not
thy hatchet at the Lord, He will turn the sharp edge against thee._

Kast ikke Barnet ud med Badet. _Throw not the child out with the bath._

Kattens Leeg er Musens Död. _What is play to the cat is death to the
mouse._

Kiærligheds Væxt vil vandes med Graad, og dyrkes med Umag. _Love’s
plant must be watered with tears, and tended with care._

Kiært Barn har mange Navne. _A pet child has many names._

Kiend Ulv Paternoster, han siger dog: “Lam! Lam!” _Though you teach a
wolf the paternoster, he will say: “Lamb! lamb!”_

Kloge Höns giör og i Nælder. _Even clever hens sometimes lay their eggs
among nettles._

Koen malkes, og ei Oxen; Faaret klippes, og ei Hesten. _The cow is
milked, not the ox; the sheep is shorn, not the horse._

Koen veed ikke af, hvad hendes Hale duer til, för hun har mistet den.
_The cow does not know the value of her tail till she has lost it._

Konst er Konst, om og ei Lykken er med. _Art is art, even though
unsuccessful._

Konst og Lære giver Bröd og Ære. _Art and knowledge bring bread and
honour._

Kragen er ikke des hvidere, at hun tidt toer sig. _A crow is never the
whiter for often washing._

Krage söger vel sin Mage. _The crow will find its mate._ (_Like will be
to like._)

Kroget Jern kan Hammeren rette. _Crooked iron may be straightened with
a hammer._

Krukken gaaer saa længe til Kilde, til hun faaer knæk. _The pitcher
goes so often to the well that it gets broken at last._

Kys er Kiærligheds bud. _Kisses are the messengers of love._


L.

Laan din Ven, og kræv din Uven. _Lend to your friend, and ask payment
of your enemy._

Laant Hest og egen Sporer giör korte Mile. _A borrowed horse and your
own spurs make short miles._

Længe at leve er længe at lide. _To live long is to suffer long._

Længe lever truet Mand, om han fanger Bröd. _A threatened man lives
long, if he can get bread._

Lad Barn have sin Villie, da græder det ei. _Let a child have its will,
and it will not cry._

Lad den blive ved Aaren, som har lært at roe. _Let him stay at the oar
who has learnt to row._

Lad din Hustru have den stakkede Kniv, og hav selv den lange. _Give
your wife the short knife, and keep the long one for yourself._

Lad Hund til Honningtrug, da springer han i med baade Been. _Let a dog
get at a dish of honey, and he will jump in with both legs._

Lands Skik, er Lands Hæder. _National customs are national honours._

Langt fra Öine snart af Sinde. _Out of sight, out of mind._

Lastelig er, at flye for en levende Fjende, og at skjelde den döde. _It
is discreditable to fly from a living enemy, or to abuse a dead one._

Lediggang er Fandens Hovedpude. _Idleness is the devil’s bolster._

Legen gaaer bedst med Jævnlige. _It is best to play with equals._

Leger du med Narren i Huset, saa leger han med dig paa Gaden. _If you
play with the fool at home, he will play with you abroad._

Leergryde baader intet af at komme i Lag med Kobberpotte. _The earthen
pan gains nothing by contact with the copper pot._

Leilighed giör Tyve. _Opportunity makes the thief._

Let er den Byrde som en anden bær. _Another man’s burden is always
light._

Liden Hvile er altid god. _A short rest is always good._

Liden Tue vælter ofte stort Læs. _A little stone may upset a large
cart._

Liden Vinding smager vel. _Small profits are sweet._

Lide og bie, lyde og lære, hjelper fattig Barn til Ære. _Suffering and
patience, obedience and application, help the lowly born to honour._

Lige Brödre giöre bedst Leg. _Like plays best with like._

Lige Bytte giör mindst Trætte. _A fair exchange brings no quarrel._

Liggende Ulv löber ikke Lam i Munde. _Lambs don’t run into the mouth of
the sleeping wolf._

List har liden Ære. _Cunning has little honour._

Löfter og raat Klæde löbe meget ind. _Promises and undressed cloth are
apt to shrink._

Lögn bliver ikke træt af at gaae lange Veie. _Falsehood never tires of
going round about._

Lögn er Fandens Datter, og taler sin Faders Maal. _Falsehood is the
Devil’s daughter, and speaks her father’s tongue._

Lögn og Dravel giver ond Avel. _Lies and gossip have a wretched
offspring._

Lögn og Latin löbe Verden omkring. _Lies and Latin go round the world._

Lögn reiser om for hun vil voxe. _Falsehood travels and grows._

Lög og Rög og en ond Qvinde komme god Mands Öine til at rinde. _Onions,
smoke, and a shrew, make a good man’s eyes water._

Lov baner Vei til Venskab. _Praise paves the way to friendship._

Loven er ærlig, Holden er besværlig. _To promise is easy, to keep is
troublesome._

Loven er de Vaagendes, Lykken er de Sovendes. _Law helps the waking,
luck may come to the sleeping._

Lovkiön og Maler kan snart giöre hvidt til sort. _Lawyers and painters
can soon change white to black._

Luen er ikke langt fra Rögen. _The flame is not far from the smoke._

Lykken banker ofte paa, Tossen lader hende ved Dören staa. _Fortune
often knocks at the door, but the fool does not invite her in._

Lykken bær en Mand over Bækken, om han gider sprunget. _Luck will carry
a man across the brook if he is not too lazy to leap._

Lykken gaaer til Dören, spörger om Forsyn er inde. _Luck taps at the
door and inquires whether prudence is within._

Lykken har meget til Mange, men nok til Ingen. _Luck has much for many,
but enough for no one._

Lykken haver skröbeligt Ankerhold. _Luck has but a slender anchorage._

Lyst og Villie giör Arbeidet ringe. _Cheerfulness and goodwill make
labour light._


M.

Mager Kalv glemmer at springe. _A lean calf forgets to skip._

Magten gaaer ofte for Konsten. _Power often goes before talent._

Magt og Mod vil have Vid med i Fölge. _Might and courage require wit in
their suite._

Man angrer ofte sin Tale, men sielden sin Taushed. _Speech is oft
repented, silence seldom._

Man bliver ei snarere skiden end af Skarn. _Meddle with dirt and some
of it will stick to you._

Mand kysser ofte den Haand, han gierne saae af at være. _A man often
kisses the hand he would like to see cut off._

Mands Ord, Mands Ære. _A man’s word is his honour._

Mands Villie, Mands Himmerige. _A man’s will is his heaven._

Man er dog ei Greve, for man æder store Leve. _A man is not a lord
because he feeds off fine dishes._

Man faaer at bage af det Meel man har. _You must contrive to bake with
the flour you have._

Man faaer det for gode Ord, som man mister for onde. _You may gain by
fair words what may fail you by angry ones._

Man faaer ei Ko af kolös Mand. _You cannot take a cow from a man who
has none._

Man faaer ei meer af Ræven end Bælgen. _You can have no more of the fox
than his skin._

Man fanger flere Fluer med en Draabe Honning end med en Tönde Ædike.
_More flies are caught with a drop of honey than with a barrel of
vinegar._

Man fylder för Maven paa en Skalk end Öiet. _It is easier to fill a
rogue’s belly than his eye._

Mange Bække smaae, giöre en stor Aa. _Many little rivulets make a great
river._

Mange have formeget, men Ingen har nok. _Many have too much, but none
have enough._

Mange Hunde ere Harens död. _Many dogs are the death of the hare._

Mange kysser Barnet for Ammens Skyld. _Many kiss the child for the
nurse’s sake._

Mange Sandkorn kommer Skib til at synke. _Many grains of sand will sink
a ship._

Mangen er god Ven, men ond Grande. _Many a man is a good friend but a
bad neighbour._

Mangen et Faar gaaer tykuldet ud og kommer klippet hiem. _Many a sheep
goes out woolly and comes home shorn._

Mangen giör megen Spad paa lidet Kiöd. _Much broth is sometimes made
with little meat._

Mangen Ko staaer i Vang, og kiger i Fælled. _Many a cow stands in the
meadow and looks wistfully at the common._

Mangen qvider for den Dag han ikke bider. _Many a man labours for the
day he will never live to see._

Mangen saae gierne sin egen Skam paa en andens Ryg. _Many a one would
like to lay his own shame on another man’s back._

Mangen vil gierne rose Ret og giöre Uret. _Many love to praise right
and do wrong._

Man giör ei god Erkebisp af en Skalk. _You cannot make a good
archbishop of a rogue._

Man giör ei godt Jagthorn af en Svinehale. _You cannot make a good
hunting-horn of a pig’s tail._

Man gnaver noget af Been, men intet af Steen. _You may get something
off a bone, but nothing off a stone._

Man har ei længer Fred end Naboen vil. _You cannot have peace longer
than your neighbour chooses._

Man har Leiligheden i Ærmet, naar man vil. _You may always find an
opportunity in your sleeve, if you like._

Man hugger ikke Hovedet af fordi det er skurvet. _A head is not to be
cut off because it is scabby._

Man hvisker stundom een noget i Öret, og hörer det over den hele By.
_Many a thing whispered into one ear is heard over the whole town._

Man kan ei drage haardt med brudet Reb. _You cannot pull hard with a
broken rope._

Man kan ei seile hvorhen man vil, men hvor Vinden blæser. _You cannot
sail as you would, but as the wind blows._

Man kan ikke bære al sin Slægt paa Skuldrene. _A man cannot carry all
his kin on his back._

Man kan ikke drikke og pibe paa eengang. _You cannot drink and whistle
at the same time._

Man kan ikke klippe Faaret længer end til Skindet. _You cannot shear
the sheep closer than the skin._

Man kan ikke see en Anden længer end til Tænderne. _No one can see into
another further than his teeth._

Man kan lukke for en Tyv, men ikke for en Lögner. _You may shut your
doors against a thief, but not against a liar._

Man kan nöde en Hest til Vands, men ikke til at drikke. _You may force
a horse to the water, but you cannot make him drink._

Man kan nöde en Mand til at blunde, men ikke til at sove. _You may
force a man to shut his eyes, but not to sleep._

Man kan nöde en Oxe til Vands, men ikke nöde ham til at drikke. _You
may force an ox to the water, but you cannot make him drink._

Man kan tænde et andet Lys af sit uden Skade. _You may light another’s
candle at your own without loss._

Man koger saa vel i smaae Gryder som i de store. _You may cook in small
pots as well as in large ones._

Man lader sig hellere bide af Ulve end af Faar. _One would rather be
bitten by wolves than by sheep._

Man maa bære sit Kors med Taalmodighed, sagde Manden, han tog sin Kone
paa Ryggen. _We must bear our cross with patience, said the man when he
took his wife on his back._

Man maa ikke lade Narre see halvgiort Arbeide. _Never let fools see
half-finished work._

Man maa tage suur Sild af onde Gieldinger. _Of bad debtors you may take
spoilt herrings._

Man meder og den Fisk som nödig vil. _Even that fish may be caught that
strives the hardest against it._

Man skal bruge den Sol som nu skinner. _Make use of the sun while it
shines._

Man skal ei bære Segel i Anden Mands Korn. _Take not your sickle to
another man’s corn._

Man skal ei bide den Hund igien som bider. _Bite not the dog that
bites._

Man skal ei forsmaae gamle Venner eller gamle Veie. _Old friends and
old ways ought not to be disdained._

Man skal ei have to Tunger i een Mund. _Keep not two tongues in one
mouth._

Man skal ei kaste Steen efter den Hund som ligger stille. _Throw no
stones at a sleeping dog._

Man skal ei skue given Hest i Munden. _Look not a gift horse in the
mouth._

Man skal fire den Stub, man har Ly af. _Honour the tree that gives you
shelter._

Man skal ikke agte Hunden efter Haarene. _Do not judge the dog by his
hairs._

Man skal ikke troe en springsk Hest, eller en stor Herre. naar de ryste
paa Hovedet. _Trust not a skittish horse, nor a great lord, when they
shake their heads._

Man skal ikke svide alt det som loddent er. _All hairy skins must not
be singed._

Man skal længe gaae bag en Vildgaas för man hitter en Strudsfieder.
_You must walk a long while behind a wild goose before you find an
ostrich feather._

Man skal længe gabe, för en stegt Due flyver een i Munden. _A man must
keep his mouth open a long while before a roast pigeon flies into it._

Man skal længe hugge paa en Elletrunte, för man faaer en Bisværm deraf.
_You must knock a long while against an alder-bush before you get a
swarm of bees out of it._

Man skal meget lide, eller tidlig döe. _We must suffer much, or die
young._

Man skal og saae efter en ond Höst. _We must sow even after a bad
harvest._

Man skal rævse godt Barn at det ikke bliver ondt, og ondt Barn at det
ikke bliver værre. _Chastise a good child, that it may not grow bad,
and a bad one, that it may not grow worse._

Man skal Sæd fölge, eller Land flye. _Follow the customs, or fly the
country._

Man skal sætte Tæring efter Næring. _Live according to your means._

Man skal skiemte med sin Lige. _Jest with your equals._

Man skal skue en Pige i et Trug Deig, og ikke i en Springedands. _You
must judge a maiden at the kneading trough, and not in a dance._

Man skal smede Jernet medens det er hedt. _Strike while the iron is
hot._

Man skal tude med de Ulve man er iblandt. _You must howl with the
wolves when you are among them._

Man skal Vidien vride medens hun er ung. _Bend the willow while it is
young._

Man prædike aldrig saa længe for Ulv, han siger dog Lam ad Aften. _You
may preach ever so long to the wolf, he will nevertheless call for lamb
before night._

Man tör ei ved at hænge Klokke paa Giekken, han ringer sig nok selv.
_There is no need to fasten a bell to a fool, he is sure to tell his
own tale._

Mæt Mave roser Fasten. _A full stomach praises Lent._

Medens græsset groer döer Horsemoder. _While the grass is growing the
mare dies._

Medens Hundene veire, löber Haren ad Skoven. _While the dogs yelp, the
hare flies to the wood._

Med Lov skal man Land bygge. _With law must the land be built._

Med Ondt skal Ondt fordrives. _Evil must be driven out by evil._

Med Ræv skal man Ræv fange. _Set a fox to catch a fox._

Mellem sige og giöre er en lang Vei. _Between saying and doing there is
a great distance._

Mennesket spaaer, Gud raa’er. _Man proposes, God disposes._

Mistanke er for Venskab Gift. _Distrust is poison to friendship._

Mölleren er Aldrig saa drukken, at han glemmer at tolde. _The miller is
never so drunk that he forgets to take his dues._

Morgenstund har Guld i Mund. _The morn hour has gold in its mouth._

Mude volder at Venskab holder. _Gifts make friendship lasting._

Munden taler tidt det Halsen maa gielde. _The mouth often utters that
which the head must answer for._

Musen veed meget, men Katten veed mere. _The mouse is knowing, but the
cat more knowing._


N.

Naar de store Klokker gaae hörer ingen de smaae. _While the great bells
are ringing no one hears the little ones._

Naar der regner paa Præsten saa drypper det paa Degnen. _When it pours
upon the parson, it drops upon the clerk._

Naar det regner Vælling, saa har Stodderen ingen Skee. _When it rains
porridge the beggar has no spoon._

Naar det skal være Held, kælver Tyren saa godt som Koen. _If it is to
be luck, the bull may as well calve as the cow._

Naar een Fod snubler er den anden nær ved Fald. _When one foot
stumbles, the other is near falling._

Naar Enden er god er alting godt. _All’s well that ends well._

Naar Enhver faaer sit, faaer Fanden intet. _When every man gets his own
the devil gets nothing._

Naar Gaasen troer Ræven, saa vee hendes Hals. _When the goose trusts
the fox then woe to her neck._

Naar Giekken kommer til Torvs faaer Kræmmeren Penge. _When fools go to
market the huckster gets money._

Naar Glæden er i Stuen, er Sorgen i Forstuen. _When joy is in the
parlour, sorrow is in the passage._

Naar Hovedet værker da værke alle Lemmer. _When the head aches all the
limbs ache._

Naar hver agter sit, bliver Gierningen giort. _When every one minds his
own business the work is done._

Naar jeg har Penge i min Pung, da har jeg Mad i min Mund. _When I have
money in my purse, I have food in my mouth._

Naar Kat og Muus giör eet, har Bonden tabt. _When cat and mouse agree,
the farmer has no chance._

Naar Katten er borte, löbe Musene paa Bænken. _When the cat’s away the
mice will play._

Naar Knarren er rorlös, gaaer den for Vrag. _When the helm is gone the
ship will soon be wrecked._

Naar Kokken steger for Kieldersvenden, saa gielder det Herrens Vinfad.
_When the cook is roasting for the butler, woe to the master’s
wine-cask._

Naar Krybben er tom rives Hestene. _When the manger is empty the horses
fight._

Naar lade Heste ville afsted, gamle Qvinder dandse, og hvide Skyer
regne, da er intet Ophör. _When lazy horses begin to start, old women
to dance, and white clouds to rain, there is no stopping them._

Naar Legen er feirest, er han bedst at lade fare. _When the game is
most thriving it is time to leave off._

Naar man er i Sækken, skal man ud af Munden eller af Bunden. _When a
man is in a sack, he must get out at the mouth or at the bottom._

Naar man seer Ulvens Ören, er han selv ikke langt borte. _When the
wolf’s ears appear, his body is not far off._

Naar man selv gaaer, sparer man Budleien. _He that performs his own
errand saves the messenger’s hire._

Naar man vil fange Ræven, spænder man Gæs for. _If you would catch a
fox you must hunt with geese._

Naar Musen er mæt, er Melet bedsk. _When the mouse has had enough the
meal is bitter._

Naar Öllet gaaer ind, da gaaer Viddet ud. _When the beer goes in the
wits go out._

Naar Ræven prædiker for Gaasen, staaer hendes Hals i vove. _When the
fox preaches to the goose her neck is in danger._

Naar Ræven slikker sin Fod, maa Bonden agte sin Gaas. _When the fox
licks his paw let the farmer look after his geese._

Naar Saaret er lægt er Svien glemt. _When the wound is healed the pain
is forgotten._

Naar Skarn kommer til Ære, veed det ei hvad det vil være. _When dirt
comes to honour it knows not what to be._

Naar Stolen raver bliver der ei længe Sæde af. _A rickety chair will
not long serve as a seat._

Naar Strængen er stindest, da brister han snarest. _When the cord is
tightest it is nearest snapping._

Naar Sværdet er i Munden, skal man klappe Balgen. _When the sword is in
the mouth you must caress the sheath._

Naar to Uvenner blæse i et Horn gaaer det over den Tredie ud. _When two
enemies blow one horn, the third will have to suffer for it._

Naar Tranen gaaer i Dands med Stodhesten, faaer hun brudne Been. _When
the crane attempts to dance with the horse she gets broken bones._

Naar Træet falder, vil alle sanke Spaaner. _When the tree falls every
one runs to gather sticks._

Naar Tyvene trættes, faaer Bonden sine Koster. _When thieves fall out
the peasant recovers his goods._

Naar Verten leer gladest, da mener han Giæstens Pung. _When the host
smiles most blandly he has an eye to the guest’s purse._

Naar Vognen helder, vil enhver skyde efter. _When the waggon is tilting
everybody gives it a shove._

Nabos Öie er avindsfuldt. _A neighbour’s eye is full of jealousy._

Nær hielper mangen Mand. _All but saves many a man._

Narren er andre Folk liig saa længe han tier. _A fool is like other men
as long as he is silent._

Nærved slaaer ingen Mand ihiel. _Almost kills no man._

Nei er et godt Svar naar det kommer i Tide. _No is a good answer when
given in time._

Nei og ja giöre lang Trætte. _No and yes cause long disputes._

Nöd bryder alle Love. _Necessity knows no law._

Nöd kommer gammel Kierling til at trave. _Need makes the old wife trot._

Nok er en stor Rigdom. _Enough is great riches._

Nye Koste feie vel. _New brooms sweep clean._

Nye Viser höres helst. _New songs are liked the best._

Nykommen er altid velkommen. _New comers are always welcome._

Nyt er altid kiært, Gammelt er stundom bedre. _The new is always liked,
though the old is often better._


O.

Ofte bedes det igien som bort kastes. _That which has been thrown away
has often to be begged for again._

Ofte er Skarlagens Hierte under reven Kaabe. _A royal heart is often
hid under a tattered cloak._

Ofte er Ulvesind under Faareskind. _Wolves are often hidden under
sheep’s clothing._

Ofte finder Muus Hul, om Stuen end var fuld af Katte. _The mouse may
find a hole, be the room ever so full of cats._

Ofte gielder Griis det gammel So gjorde. _The young pig must often
suffer for what the old sow did._

Ofte kommer Regn efter Solskin, og efter Muln klart Veir. _Rain comes
oft after sunshine, and after a dark cloud a clear sky._

Ofte sidder rigt Barn paa fattig Moders Skjöd. _A rich child often sits
in a poor mother’s lap._

Öientieneste er Hofmands Art. _Eye-service is the courtier’s art._

Ond Afkom brouter mest af god Æt. _Unworthy offspring brag the most of
their worthy descent._

Onde Tunger onde Ören, de ene saa gode som de andre. _Between evil
tongues and evil ears, there is nothing to choose._

Onde Urter voxe mest, og forgaae senest. _Ill weeds grow the fastest
and last the longest._

Ond Giæst er velkommen som Salt i suur Öie. _An unpleasant guest is as
welcome as salt to a sore eye._

Ond Gierning har Vidne i Barmen. _An evil deed has a witness in the
bosom._

Ond Kone önsker Mandens Hæl til Gaarde og ikke hans Taa. _A bad wife
wishes her husband’s heel turned homewards, and not his toe._

Ond Qvinde er Fandens Dörnagle. _An ill-tempered woman is the devil’s
door-nail._

Ond Rod giver ei godt Æble. _A bad tree does not yield good apples._

Ondt Barn skal man ilde vugge. _A naughty child must be roughly rocked._

Ondt bliver aldrig godt för halv værre kommer. _Bad is never good until
worse happens._

Ondt er at gildre for gammel Ræv. _It is difficult to trap an old fox._

Ondt er at sanke Ax efter gierrig Agermand. _It is hard to glean after
a niggardly husbandman._

Ondt er at sejle uden Vind og at slibe uden Vand. _It is hard to sail
without wind, and to grind without water._

Ondt er at stötte sig til ludende Væg. _It is bad to lean against a
falling wall._

Ondt er snart giort, men seent bodet. _Evil is soon done, but slowly
mended._

Ondt öder sig selv. _Evil wastes itself._

Ondt Öie skal intet Godt see. _An evil eye can see no good._

Opædt Bröd vil nödig betales. _It is hard to pay for bread that has
been eaten._

Ord binde en Mand og Hampereb Oxen. _A man is bound by his word, an ox
with a hempen cord._


P.

“Peder, sagde Gaasen, “jeg ager,” der Ræven löb ad Skoven med hende.
_”Peter, I am taking a ride,” said the goose, when the fox was running
into the wood with her._

Penge tale meer end tolv Tingmænd. _Money is more eloquent than a dozen
members of parliament._

Præsten Bogen, Bonden Plogen. _The priest to his book, the peasant to
his plough._

Præstesæk er ond at fylde. _A priest’s pocket is not easily filled._


R.

Raad efter giort Gierning er som Regn naar Kornet er höstet. _Counsel
after action is like rain after harvest._

Raad efter Skaden er som Lægedom efter Döden. _Advice after the
mischief is like medicine after death._

Raad er ei bedre end Uraad, uden det tages i Tide. _Good counsel is no
better than bad counsel, if it be not taken in time._

Ræd Mand har tynd Lykke. _A timid man has little chance._

Ræven gaaer ei to Gange paa eet Gilder. _The fox does not go twice into
the same trap._

Ravnen synes altid at hendes Unger ere de hvideste. _The raven always
thinks that her young ones are the whitest._

Ravn er fager, naar Raage ei er hos. _The raven is fair when the rook
is not by._

Red Hunden för end Haren löber. _Hold your dog in readiness before you
start the hare._

Reen Haand færdes tryg giennem Land. _A clean hand moves freely through
the land._

Retfærdig bliver aldrig braadrig. _The upright never grow rich in a
hurry._

Rigdom bliver vel lastet, men aldrig forkastet. _Riches are often
abused, but never refused._

Rigdom har Sorg, og Armod har Tryghed. _Riches breed care, poverty is
safe._

Rigdom og Gunst gaaer for Visdom og Kunst. _Riches and favour go before
wisdom and art._

Rig Hustru er Trættetynder. _A rich wife is a source of quarrel._

Riig Enkes Taarer törres snart. _The rich widow’s tears soon dry._

Riis er bedre end Rævesvands. _A rod is better than a fox’s brush._

Ringe Mistanke kan spilde godt Rygte. _A slight suspicion may destroy a
good repute._

Roes Ganten saa faaer du gavn af ham. _Praise a fool, and you may make
him useful._

Runde Hænder gjöre mange Venner. _Liberal hands make many friends._

Rust æder Jern og Avind æder sig selv. _Rust consumes iron, and envy
consumes itself._

Rygtet kommer för til Byes end Manden. _A man’s character reaches town
before his person._

Ry og Rygte fölger Mand til Dör. _Fame and repute follow a man to the
door._


S.

Saa er hver hædt som han er klædt. _As a man dresses so is he esteemed._

Saa flyver hver Fugl som han er fiedret. _According to his pinions the
bird flies._

Saa grynte Griis efter som gammel Sviin fore (för dem). _Young pigs
grunt as old swine grunted before them._

Saa kan man böie Bue, at den brister. _The bow may be bent until it
breaks._

Saa længe en Mand er unævnt er han uskiændt. _A man who is not spoken
of is not abused._

Saa lever Hönen af sit Skrab, som Löven af sit Rov. _The hen lives by
pickings, as the lion by prey._

Saa mange Hoveder saa mange Sind. _So many heads, so many minds._

Sæl er den, der kan see ved anden Mands Skade. _Happy he who can take
warning from the mishaps of others._

Sælg ikke Bælgen för du har fanget Ræven. _Don’t sell the skin till you
have caught the fox._

Sammen söge Sellige, et skabbet Ög og et sandigt Dige. _Like seeks
like—a scabbed horse and a sandy dike._

Sandhed er en suur Kost. _Truth is bitter food._

Sandhed og Daarskab sidde begge i Viinfadet. _Truth and folly dwell in
the wine-cask._

Sandhed skal man lære af Börn og drukne Folk. _Children and drunken men
speak the truth._

Sandtalende Qvinde har faae Venner. _A truth-telling woman has few
friends._

See Dig vel for, Fraade er ikke Öl. _Beware, froth is not beer._

Seil mens Vinden blæser, Bören bier efter Ingen. _Sail while the breeze
blows, wind and tide wait for no man._

Selvgiort er velgiort. _What you do yourself is well done._

Sielden bliver blu Hund fed. _A modest dog seldom grows fat._

Sielden dandser bold Kiortel saa vel som mæt Bug. _A full belly dances
better than a fine coat._

Sielden er Grenen bedre end Bullen. _The branch is seldom better than
the stem._

Sielden kommer Sorg ene. _Sorrow seldom comes alone._

Sielden skiærer man godt Korn af ond Ager. _Good corn is not reaped
from a bad field._

Sielden sukker glad Hierte, men tidt leer sorrigfuld Mund. _A glad
heart seldom sighs, but a sorrowful mouth often laughs._

Silde Bod er sielden god. _Late repentance is seldom worth much._

Silketunge og Blaargarns Hierte fölges ofte ad. _Silken tongue and
hempen heart often go together._

Skaden kommer ei gierne ene til Huus. _Misfortune seldom comes alone to
the house._

Skal Lögnen troes, da maae den flikkes med Sandhed. _If lies are to
find credence, they must be patched with truth._

Skindtiig faaer ei söd Mælk uden der er druknet Muus i. _The watch-dog
does not get sweet milk unless there be drowned mice in it._

Skjorten er Kroppen nærmere end Kiortelen. _The shirt is nearer to the
body than the coat._

Skov haver Ören, og Mark haver Öien. _The forest has ears, and the
field has eyes._

Slagt ei meer end du kan salte, eller du faaer sure Stege. _Kill no
more than you can salt, or you will have tainted meat._

Smaae Börn, smaae Sorger; store Börn, store Sorger. _Little children,
little sorrows; big children, great sorrows._

Smaae Helgen giöre og Jertegn. _Little saints also perform miracles._

Smaae Sorger tale, de store tie. _Little sorrows are loud, great ones
silent._

Smedebörn rædes ei for gnister. _Blacksmith’s children are not afraid
of sparks._

Smiger er söd mad, hov den gider ædt. _Flattery is sweet food for those
who can swallow it._

Smör fordærver ingen Mad, og Lemfældighed skader ingen Sag. _Butter
spoils no meat, and moderation injures no cause._

Smuler ere og Bröd. _Even crumbs are bread._

Snart og vel ere sielden sammen. _Quick and well seldom go together._

Söde Ord fylde kun lidt i Sækken. _Fair words won’t fill the sack._

Soen er helst i Söle. _The sow prefers the mire._

Sög Raad hos Ligemænd, og Hielp hos Overmænd. _Ask advice of your
equals, help of your superiors._

Sölv og Guld er hver Mand Huld. _Silver and gold are all men’s dears._

Som de Gamle siunge saa tviddre de Unge. _As the old ones sing, the
young ones twitter._

Som Herren er saa fölge ham Svende. _As the master is, so are his men._

Som Manden, saa og hans Tale. _As the man is, so is his speech._

Som man reder til, saa ligger man. _As you make your bed so you must
lie on it._

Sqvalder drukner for god Kones Dör. _Slander expires at a good woman’s
door._

Stagrende Mand skal sig ved Kiep stöde. _A tottering man must lean upon
a staff._

Stakkarl er Staadder værst, naar han Magt fanger. _No one so hard upon
the poor as the pauper who has got into power._

Stakket er Höneflu, uden Hane fluer med. _The hen flies not far unless
the cock flies with her._

Stakket Hör giver og lang Traad. _Short flax makes long thread._

Stakket Hund, kuldet Ko, og liden Mand ere gierne hovmodige. _A little
dog, a cow without horns, and a short man, are generally proud._

Stakket Lyst har tidt lang anger. _Short pleasure often brings long
repentance._

Stærke Mands Spil er kranke Mands Död. _What is play to the strong is
death to the weak._

Store Drikke, og lang Morgensövn, gjöre snart fattig. _Deep draughts,
and long morning slumbers, soon make a man poor._

Store Herrer have lange Hænder, men de naae ikke til Himlen. _Great
lords have long hands, but they do not reach to heaven._

Store Herrer ville have meget, og fattigt Folk kan lidet give. _Great
lords will have much, and poor folk can give but little._

Store Ord giöre sielden from Gierning. _Big words seldom go with good
deeds._

Styr Hest med Bidsel og ond Kone med Kiep. _Govern a horse with a bit,
and a shrew with a stick._

Svig og Sqvalder have lang Alder. _Treachery and slander are long
lived._

Sygdom er hver Mands Herre. _Sickness is every man’s master._

Sygdom kommer selvbuden—man har ei nödig at sende efter den. _Sickness
comes uninvited—no need to bespeak it._

Sygen löber til og kryber fra. _Sickness comes in haste, and goes at
leisure._

Syn gaaer altid for Sagn. _Sight goes before hearsay._


T.

Taalmodigheds Urt groer ikke i hver Mands Have. _The herb patience does
not grow in every man’s garden._

Tag Gæssene vare naar Ræven prædiker. _Take care of your geese when the
fox preaches._

Tag Mange til Hielp og Faa til Raad. _Take help of many, advice of few._

Tag Raad af rödskjægged Mand, og gaae snart fra ham. _Take advice of a
red-bearded man, and be gone._

Takkelös Mand giör aldrig tækkelig Gierning. _A thankless man never
does a thankful deed._

Tal sagte om din Skade, og roes ikke din Lykke. _Speak little of your
ill luck, and boast not of your good luck._

Tanden bider ofte Tungen og dog bliver de eens. _The tooth often bites
the tongue, and yet they keep together._

Taus Mand troes mest. _The silent man is most trusted._

Tiden bier efter ingen Mand. _Time waits for no man._

Tiden er ei bunden ved Pæl, som Hest ved Krybbe. _Time is not tied to a
post, like a horse to the manger._

Tidt er Gift og Galde under Honningtale. _Honeyed speech often conceals
poison and gall._

Tidt er vanskabt Sind under fagert Skind. _A fair skin often covers a
crooked mind._

Tidt faaer man det Tungt paa sin Ryg, som man tog let paa sin
Samvittighed. _You may often feel that heavily on your back which you
took lightly on your conscience._

Tidt forer man Sandheds Kaabe med Lögn. _Truth’s cloak is often lined
with lies._

Tidt gaaer Retten frem som Pungen veier til. _Justice oft leans to the
side where the purse pulls._

Tidt meder man ei did som man vil skyde. _A man does not always aim at
what he means to hit._

Tidt nok galer Hanen uden Seir. _The cock often crows without a
victory._

Tidt vil den du sætter paa din Axel, sidde paa dit Hoved. _He that you
seat upon your shoulder will often try to get upon your head._

Tiende Mands Ord komme ei til Tinge. _A silent man’s words are not
brought into court._

Til Hove ere hale Trapper. _The steps at court are slippery._

Til Hove sælges megen Rög uden Ild. _At court they sell a good deal of
smoke without fire._

Til Nabotrætte bære flere Ild end Vand. _When neighbours quarrel,
lookers-on are more apt to add fuel than water._

Til Udyd behöves ingen Skolemester. _Vice is learnt without a
schoolmaster._

Ti Nei er bedre end een Lögn. _Ten noes are better than one lie._

To ere een Mands Herre. _Two are the masters of one._

To Hund og kæm Hund, dog er Hund som han förre var. _Wash a dog and
comb a dog, he still remains a dog._

To maae saa lyve, at den tredie hænger. _Two may lie so as to hang a
third._

Tom Kjelder giör galen Rede-Svend. _An empty cellar makes an angry
butler._

Tomme Tönder buldre mest. _Empty barrels give the most sound._

Tomme Vogne buldre meest. _Empty waggons make most noise._

Tordenregn og Herregunst falder altid ujevnt. _Thundershowers and great
men’s favour are always partial._

Tör Ved giör rask Ild. _Dry wood makes a quick fire._

Trang og Nöd bryde Tro og Ed. _Want and necessity break faith and
oaths._

Træet bliver vel stækket för det voxer til Sky. _The tree is sure to be
pruned before it reaches the skies._

Tre ere onde i Huus: Rög, Regn og en ond Qvinde. _Smoke, rain, and a
scolding wife, are three bad things in a house._

Tre Qvinder og een Gaas gjöre et Marked. _Three women and a goose make
a market._

Tre Ting giöre ikke godt uden Hugg: Valnödtræet, Asenet, og en ond
Qvinde. _There are three things from which no good can be got without a
beating: a walnut-tree, a donkey, and a shrew._

Tro alle vel, men dig selv bedst. _Trust everybody, but thyself most._

Tro ei stille Vand og tiende Mand. _Trust not still water nor a silent
man._

Tungen slides ei af gode Ord. _Kind words don’t wear out the tongue._

Tyv tænker Hvermand stiæler. _A thief thinks every man steals._


U.

Udi söd Tale ligger Falskhed i dvale. _Treachery lurks in honeyed
words._

Uglen mener hendes Börn ere de fagerste. _The owl thinks her children
the fairest._

Uglen priser ei Dagen, eller Ulven ei Hunden. _The owl does not praise
the light, nor the wolf the dog._

Ukrud forgaaer ikke. _Weeds never die out._

Ulv tager ei Brad paa sin egen Mark. _The wolf preys not in his own
field._

Under hvid Aske ligger ofte gloende Kul. _Under white ashes lie often
glowing embers._

Under hvide Liin, skiules tidt skabet Skind. _Fine linen often conceals
a scabby skin._

Unge Hunde har skarpe Tænder. _Young dogs have sharp teeth._

Ungt Föl og gammel Hest de drage ei tillige. _A young foal and an old
horse draw not well together._

Uraad kommer tidligt nok. _Mischief comes soon enough._

Uvillig Gierning tiener ingen Tak. _Unwilling service earns no thanks._


V.

Vad ikke over Vand, hvor du ei seer Bund. _Do not wade where you see no
bottom._

Vandet löber, mens Mölleren sover. _The water runs while the miller
sleeps._

Vaer dig for Hunden, Skyggen bider ikke. _Beware of the dog himself,
his shadow does not bite._

Var Avind en Feber, var al Verden syg. _If envy were a fever, all the
world would be ill._

Var det giort med Skiægget, da vandt Giedebukken. _If a beard were all,
the goat would be the winner._

Vare Tanker Tingsvidne, da blev mangen, ærlig Mand til en Skielm. _If
thoughts were legal witnesses, many an honest man would be proved a
rogue._

Vælsk Andagt og tydsk Faste gjelder intet. _Italian devotion and German
fasting have no meaning._

Var Lögn Latin, da var der mange lærde Folk. _If lies were Latin, there
would be many learned men._

Varp ei mere op end du kan væve. _Do not put in more warp than you can
weave._

Værge byder Landefred. _The sword keeps the peace of the land._

Vee vorde ondt Öie. _Woe be to an evil eye._

Vel begyndt er halv fuldendt. _Well begun is half done._

Velgiort skal man aldrig angre. _Never repent a good action._

Venlige Ord og faa ere Qvinders Pryd. _Kind words and few are a woman’s
ornament._

Venners Feil maa man mærke, men ei laste. _A friend’s faults may be
noticed, but not blamed._

Vigtig Gierning vil drives med faa Ord. _Weighty work must be done with
few words._

Vi sidde nu alle vel, sagde Katten han sad paa Flesket. _We are all
well placed, said the cat, when she was seated on the bacon._

Vognen faaer at gaa, hvor Hestene drage ham. _The waggon must go
whither the horses draw it._

Vor Herre kommer nok, om han end ikke kommer til Hest. _The Lord will
not fail to come, though he may not come on horseback._




                                INDEX.

     French 1-64. Italian 65-132. German 133-192. Spanish 193-262.
          Portuguese 263-295. Dutch 296-345. Danish 346-403.


  A.

  A bad beginning may make a good ending, 167

  A bad (or lean, or meagre) compromise is better than a good (or fat)
  lawsuit, 62, 97, 135, 144, 231, 314, 350

  A bad heart and a good stomach, 38

  A bad horse eats as much as a good one, 366

  A bad knife cuts one’s finger instead of the stick, 273

  A bad labour, and a daughter after all, 239

  A bad man’s gift is like his master, 210

  A bad penny always comes back, 136

  A bad thing never dies, 209

  A bad tree does not yield good apples, 394

  A bad wife wishes her husband’s heel turned homewards, and not his
  toe, 394

  A bad workman never finds a good tool, 38

  A bad wound may be cured, bad repute kills, 227

  A baptised Jew is a circumcised Christian, 149

  A bargain is a bargain, 150

  A barking cur does not bite, 76

  A barking dog was never a good biter, 240—_see_ Barking dogs

  A barking dog was never a good hunter, 291

  A barren sow is never kind to pigs, 371

  A bashful dog never fattens, 147

  A beard lathered is half shaved, 74, 268

  A beard well lathered is half shaved, 204

  A beautiful woman smiling, bespeaks a purse weeping, 74

  A beggar is never out of his road, 35

  A beggar’s estate lies in all lands, 300

  A beggar’s hand is a bottomless basket, 306

  A beggar’s wallet is never full, 277

  A bellyful is a bellyful, 59

  A bespattered hog tries to bespatter another, 261

  A better seldom comes after, 168

  A big (long) nose never spoiled a handsome face, 27

  A bird in the cage is worth a hundred at large, 97

  A bird may be ever so small, it always seeks a nest of its own, 346

  A black hen lays a white egg, 40

  A blind hen can sometimes find her corn, 61

  A blind horse goes straightforward, 136

  A blind man is no judge of colours, 101

  A blind man may sometimes shoot a crow, 312

  A blind man swallows many a fly, 142

  A blind man’s stroke, which raises a dust from beneath water, 239

  A blind pigeon may sometimes find a grain of wheat, 351

  A blow from a frying-pan, if it does not hurt, smuts, 217

  A bold attempt is half success, 369

  A bold man has luck in his train, 363

  A bold onset is half the battle, 170

  A bolt does not always fall when it thunders (There are more
  threatened than struck), 147

  A boor remains a boor, though he sleep on silken bolsters, 365

  A borrowed horse and your own spurs make short miles, 383

  A boy’s love is water in a sieve, 199

  A brain is worth little without a tongue, 61

  A braying ass eats little hay, 72

  A brilliant daughter makes a brittle wife, 312

  Abroad one has a hundred eyes, at home not one, 141

  A buffeting threatened is never well given, 205

  A burnt child dreads the fire, 149, 313

  A burnt child dreads the fire, and a bitten child dreads a dog, 351

  A bustling mother makes a slothful daughter, 280

  A buxom widow must be married, buried, or cloistered, 262

  A cake and a bad custom ought to be broken, 19

  A calm portends a storm, 105

  A capon eight months old is fit for a king’s table, 208, 272

  A cat has nine lives, as the onion seven skins, 143

  A cat may look at a king, 169, 314

  A cat pent up becomes a lion, 99

  A cat that licks the spit is not to be trusted with roast meat, 68

  A cat that meweth much catcheth but few mice, 314

  A child must creep until it learns to walk, 348

  A child of a year old sucks milk from the heel, 210

  A child’s back must be bent early, 348

  A child’s sorrow is short-lived, 348

  A church stone drops gold—(Galician), 239

  A churl knows not the worth of spurs (_i.e._ honour), 64

  A clean hand moves freely through the land, 395

  A clean mouth and an honest hand, will take a man through any land,
  166

  A clear bargain, a dear friend, 118

  A clear conscience is a good pillow, 61

  A clever man’s inheritance is found in every country, 354

  A cloak is not made for a single shower of rain, 114

  A close mouth and open eyes never did any one harm, 172

  A clown enriched knows neither relation nor friend, 64

  A cock is valiant on his own dunghill, 314

  A colt is good for nothing if it does not break its halter, 55

  A contented ass enjoys a long life, 267

  A courtier should be without feeling and without honour, 61

  A covetous abbot for one offering loses a hundred, 193

  A covetous woman deserves a swindling gallant, 2

  A cow does not know what her tail is worth until she has lost it, 63

  A cow from afar gives plenty of milk, 63

  A cow is not called dappled unless she has a spot, 381

  A cow-year, a sad year; a bull-year, a glad year, 314

  A coward often deals a mortal blow to the brave, 14

  A cracked bell will never be sound, 207

  A cracked pot never fell off the hook, 120

  A crazy vessel never falls from the hand, 261

  A crooked log makes a good fire, 9

  A cross-grained woman and a snappish dog take care of the house, 347

  A crow is never the whiter for often washing, 383

  A crown is no cure for the headache, 93, 146, 318

  A cur’s tail grows fast, 69

  A curse will not strike out an eye unless the fist go with it, 348

  A daily guest is a great thief in the kitchen, 312

  A dainty stomach beggars the purse (Much taste, much waste), 190

  A dead man does not make war, 131

  A dead man does not speak (Dead men tell no tales), 279

  A dead man has neither relations nor friends, 62

  A deaf auditor makes a crazy answerer, 365

  A deaf husband and a blind wife are always a happy couple, 38

  A dealer in onions is a good judge of scallions, 38

  A determined heart will not be counselled, 209

  A devotee’s face and a cat’s claws, 208

  A doctor and a boor know more than a doctor alone, 142

  A dog in the manger, that neither eats nor lets others eat, 271

  A dog is a dog whatever his colour, 380

  A dog is never offended at being pelted with bones, 114

  A dog may look at a bishop, 61

  A dog never bit me but I had some of his hair, 97

  A dog with a bone knows no friend, 314

  A door must either be open or shut, 22

  A dram of discretion is worth a pound of wisdom, 144

  A drop of honey catches more flies than a hogshead of vinegar, 162

  A drop of water breaks a stone, 124

  A drowning man clings to a blade of grass, 62

  A drowning man would catch at razors, 86

  A drunken man may soon be made to dance, 363

  A dull ass near home trots without the stick, 267

  A fair exchange bring no quarrel, 384

  A fair face will get its praise, though the owner keep silent, 367

  A fair promise binds a fool, 8

  A fair skin often covers a crooked mind, 400

  A fair-weather friend changes with the wind, 198, 265

  A farthing saved is twice earned, 123

  A fast day is the eve of a feast day, 217

  A fast horse does not want the spur, 272

  A fat kitchen, a lean testament, 100

  A fat kitchen is next door to poverty, 69

  A fat kitchen makes a lean will, 19, 148

  A father’s love, for all other is air, 199

  A father maintains ten children better than ten children one father,
  145

  A fault confessed is half forgiven, 291

  A fault denied is twice committed, 61

  A fence between makes love more keen, 145

  A fence lasts three years, a dog lasts three fences, a horse three
  dogs, and a man three horses, 145

  A fifth wheel to a cart is but an incumbrance, 228

  A fine cage won’t feed the bird, 28

  A fine girl and a tattered gown always find something to hook them, 8

  A fine shot never killed a bird, 74

  A finger’s length in a sword, and a palm in a lance, are a great
  advantage, 274

  A fish should swim three times: in water, in sauce, and in wine, 138

  A flying crow always catches something, 316

  A fool and his money are soon parted, 313

  A fool can ask more questions than seven wise men can answer, 130

  A fool, if he holds his tongue, passes for wise, 216

  A fool is always beginning, 62

  A fool is like other men as long as he is silent, 393

  A fool knows his own business better than a wise man knows that of
  others, 124

  A fool laughs when others laugh, 347

  A fool may chance to say a wise thing, 313

  A fool only wins the first game, 365

  A fool sometimes gives good counsel, 213

  A fool throws a stone into a well, and it requires a hundred wise men
  to get it out again, 130

  A fool, unless he know Latin, is never a great fool, 259

  A foolish judge passes a brief sentence (A fool’s bolt is soon shot),
  14

  A foolish woman is known by her finery, 18

  A fool’s bolt is soon shot, 144, 163

  A fool’s head never whitens, 58

  A fortress on its guard is not surprised, 208

  A foul mouth must be provided with a strong back, 366

  A friend, and look to thyself, 71

  A friend at one’s back is a safe bridge, 316

  A friend in need is a friend indeed, 316

  A friend is known in time of need, 6, 41

  A friend is better than money in the purse (Better a friend than money
  to spend), 316

  A friend is not known till he is lost, 106

  A friend is to be taken with his faults, 287

  A friend to my table and wine, is no good neighbour, 60

  A friend’s dinner is soon dressed, 341

  A friend’s fault should be known but not abhorred, 264

  A friend’s faults may be noticed, but not blamed, 403

  A friend’s meat is soon ready, 63

  A full belly counsels well, 63

  A full belly dances better than a fine coat, 397

  A full belly is neither good for flight nor fighting, 260

  A full belly sets a man jigging, 15

  A full man is no eater, 279

  A full sack pricks up its ear, 124

  A full stomach praises Lent, 390

  A full vessel must be carried carefully, 369

  A galled horse does not want to be curried, 13

  A gaunt brute bites sore, 15

  A gentleman of Beauce who stays in bed till his breeches are mended,
  19

  A gift delayed, and long expected, is not given, but sold dear, 93

  A gilt bridle for an old mule, 7

  A girl, a vineyard, an orchard, and a bean-field, are hard to watch,
  283

  A girl draws more than a rope, 231

  A girl unemployed is thinking of mischief, 18

  A glad heart seldom sighs, but a sorrowful mouth often laughs, 397

  A glaring sunny morning, a woman that talks Latin, and a child reared
  on wine, never come to a good end, 57

  A glutton young, a beggar old, 156

  A goaded ass must needs trot, 4, 72

  A golden bit makes none the better horse, 99, 150

  A golden hammer breaks an iron gate (Gold goes in at any gate), 150

  A golden key opens every door, 78

  A golden key opens every door save that of heaven, 372

  A good advice is as good as an eye in the hand, 61

  A good anvil does not fear the hammer, 75

  A good appetite does not want sauce, 75

  A good beast heats with eating, 9

  A good beginning makes a good ending, 76

  A good cause needs help, 8

  A good cavalier never lacks a lance, 65

  A good cock was never fat, 278

  A good conscience is a soft pillow, 151

  A good dog hunts by instinct, 8

  A good dog never barks at fault, 27

  A good dog never gets a good bone, 1

  A good driver turns in a small space, 8

  A good fire makes a quick cook, 320

  A good fox does not eat his neighbour’s fowls, 61

  A good friend is better than silver and gold, 314

  A good gaper makes two gapers, 61

  A good handicraft has a golden foundation, 371

  A good head does not want for hats, 48

  A good heart breaks bad fortune, 206

  A good horse and a bad horse need the spur; a good woman and a bad
  woman need the stick, 76

  A good horse is worth his fodder, 313

  A good horse never lacks a saddle, 65

  A good king is better than an old law, 371

  A good lawyer, a bad neighbour, 8, 205

  A good life defers wrinkles, 206

  A good man is a man of goods, 9

  A good meal is worth hanging for, 143

  A good name covers theft, 205

  A good name is a rich inheritance, 143

  A good name is better than oil (_i. e._ riches), 313

  A good neighbour is better than a brother far off, 371

  A good paymaster does not hesitate to give good security, 76

  A good paymaster is keeper of other men’s purses, 216

  A good paymaster needs no security, 196

  A good pilot is not known when the sea is calm and the weather fair,
  371

  A good repast ought to begin with hunger, 61

  A good swimmer is not safe against drowning, 8

  A good swordsman is never quarrelsome, 9

  A good thing is known when it is lost, 269

  A good thing lost is a good thing valued, 205

  A good thing lost is valued, 75

  A good trade will carry farther than a thousand florins, 161

  A good word extinguishes more than a pailful of water, 231

  A good word quenches more than a caldron of water, 281

  A goose, a woman, and a goat, are bad things lean, 263

  A goose drinks as much as a gander, 365

  A gosling flew over the Rhine, and came home a goose, 145

  A gossiping woman talks of everybody, and everybody of her, 283

  A grain does not fill a sieve, but it helps its fellow, 223

  A greased mouth cannot say no, 75

  A great book is a great evil, 314

  A great church and little devotion, 100

  A great estate is not gotten in a few hours, 19

  A great lance-thrust to a dead Moor, 199, 260

  A great leap gives a great shake, 195

  A great liar has need of a good memory, 74

  A great man’s entreaty is a command, 254

  A great talker is a great liar, 19

  Agree between yourselves (as to the time), quoth Arlotto, and I will
  make it rain, 66

  A greedy mill grinds all kinds of corn, 370

  A green Christmas makes a fat churchyard, 365

  A guest and a fish after three days are poison, 37

  A guest and a fish stink in three days, 109, 218, 288, 313

  A hair casts its shadow on the ground, 260

  A hair of the dog cures the bite, 91

  A handful of good life is better than seven bushels of learning, 39

  A handful of might is better than a sack full of right, 143

  A handful of motherwit is worth a bushel of learning, 231

  A handsome hostess is bad for the purse, 8, 224, 279

  A handsome woman is either silly or vain, 227

  A handsome shoe often pinches the foot, 31

  A handsome man is not quite poor, 205

  A happy heart is better than a full purse, 96

  A hard bit does not make the better horse, 372

  A hawk’s marriage: the hen is the better bird, 38

  A head is not to be cut off because it is scabby, 387

  A headless army fights badly, 380

  A hearth of your own is worth gold, 365

  A heavy shower is soon over, 104

  A hired horse and one’s own spurs make short miles, 149, 313

  A honeyed tongue with a heart of gall, 30

  A horse grown fat kicks, 77

  A horse may stumble, though he have four legs, 76, 315

  A house filled with guests is eaten up and ill spoken of, 208

  A house full of daughters is a cellar full of sour beer, 314

  A house ready built and a vineyard ready planted, 208

  A house ready made and a wife to make, 37

  A huckster who cannot pass off mouseturd for pepper, has not learned
  his trade, 144

  A hundred bakers, a hundred millers, and a hundred tailors are three
  hundred thieves, 328

  A hundred tailors, a hundred millers, and a hundred weavers are three
  hundred thieves, 208

  A hundred waggonsful of sorrow will not pay a handful of debt, 380

  A hundred years a banner, a hundred years a barrow—A very old proverb,
  signifying the changeful fortunes of great feudal families], 10

  A hundred years cannot repair a moment’s loss of honour, 70

  A hundred years hence we shall all be bald, 193

  A hundred years is not much, but never is a long while, 10

  A hundred years of regret pay not a farthing of debt, 10, 153

  A hundred years of wrong do not make an hour of right, 153

  A hungry ass eats any straw, 72

  A hungry belly has no ears, 63, 131, 143, 220, 290, 314

  A hungry clown is half mad, 64

  A hungry dog and a thirsty horse take no heed of blows, 380

  A hungry dog does not fear the stick, 13, 76

  A hungry man discovers more than a hundred lawyers, 231

  A hungry wolf is not at rest, 280

  A husband with one eye rather than with one son, 218

  A jackfish does more than a letter of recommendation, 61

  A jade eats as much as a good horse, 110

  A joyous evening often leads to a sorrowful morning, 371

  A kick from a mare never hurt a horse, 27

  A kitchen-dog is never a good rabbit-hunter, 240

  A kitchen dog never was good for the chase, 76

  A lame goat will not sleep by day, 206

  A lame man won’t walk with one who is lamer, 60

  A landmark is well placed between two brothers’ fields, 28

  A large fire often comes from a small spark, 346

  A lawsuit for a maravedi consumes a real’s worth of paper, 198

  A lawyer and a cart-wheel must be greased, 142

  A lazy boy and a warm bed are difficult to part, 354

  A lazy ox is little the better for the goad, 193

  A lean calf forgets to skip, 386

  A lean compromise is better than a fat lawsuit (Agree, for the law is
  costly), 144, 314—_see also_ A bad compromise, &c.

  A lean horse does not kick, 77

  A liar is sooner caught than a cripple, 121, 126, 281

  A liar must have a good memory, 74, 314

  A lie has short legs, 273

  A light belly, a heavy heart, 158

  A litigious man, a liar, 20

  A little absence does much good, 62

  A little dinner, long expected and cold, is by no means given, but
  dearly sold, 45

  A little dog, a cow without horns, and a short man, are generally
  proud, 399

  A little gall spoils (or embitters) a great deal of honey, 62, 121,
  240, 242

  A little help does a great deal, 62

  A little injury dismays, and a great one stills, 292

  A little leaven leavens (sours) a great mass, 45

  A little loss frightens, a great one tames, 240

  A little makes a debtor and much an enemy, 290

  A little man fells a great oak, 45

  A little man often casts a long shadow, 92

  A little man sometimes casts a long shadow, 62

  A little pack serves a little pedlar, 4

  A little pot is soon hot, 314

  A little rain stills a great wind, 45

  A little sheep always seems young, 45

  A little spark kindles a great fire, 120, 173, 212

  A little spark shines in the dark, 45

  A little stone may upset a large cart, 120, 384

  A little thing often helps, 45

  A little too late, much too late, 144, 316

  A little truth makes the whole lie pass, 130

  A living ass is better than a dead doctor, 131

  A load of March dust is worth a ducat, 144

  A long tongue betokens a short hand, 226, 265

  A lord of straw devours a vassal of steel, 62

  A lord without land, is like a cask without wine, 374

  A lordly taste makes a beggar’s purse, 151

  A lovelorn cook oversalts the porridge, 172

  A lover’s anger is short-lived, 125

  A loving man, a jealous man, 131

  A mad dog cannot live long, 13

  A mad parish, a mad priest, 68

  A man cannot carry all his kin on his back, 388

  A man assailed is half overcome, 20

  A man, a word; a word, a man, 144

  A man conducts himself abroad as he has been taught at home, 375

  A man dances all the same, though he may dance against his will, 373

  A man does not always aim at what he means to hit, 400

  A man does not look behind the door unless he has stood there himself,
  354

  A man forewarned is as good as two—(Forewarned is forearmed),
  224—_see_ A man warned, &c.

  A man is bound by his word, an ox with a hempen cord, 395

  A man is not a lord because he feeds off fine dishes, 386

  A man is not known till he cometh to honour, 333

  A man is valued according to his own estimate of himself, 7

  A man may hap to bring home with him what makes him weep, 196

  A man may threaten yet be afraid, 58

  A man must eat, though every tree were a gallows, 333

  A man must keep his mouth open a long while before a roast pigeon
  flies into it, 389

  A man of straw is worth a woman of gold, 62, 279

  A man of straw needs a woman of gold, 130

  A man often kisses the hand he would fain see cut off, 386

  A man overboard, a mouth the less, 315

  A man’s character reaches town before his person, 396

  A man’s face is a lion’s, 140

  A man’s own opinion is never wrong, 103

  A man’s will is his heaven, 386

  A man’s word is his honour, 386

  A man takes his own wherever he finds it, 43

  A man that has had his fill is no eater, 224

  A man that is lean, not from hunger, is harder than brass, 256

  A man travels as far in a day as a snail in a hundred years, 6

  A man warned is as good as two, 62, 130, 224

  A man warned is half saved, 149

  A man well mounted is always proud, 62

  A man who has but one eye must take good care of it, 50

  A man who is not spoken of is not abused, 396

  A man who wants bread is ready for anything, 15

  A man who wants to drown his dog says he is mad, 54

  A man without money is like a ship without sails, 315

  A meagre (or lean) compromise is better than a fat lawsuit, 350

  A measly hog infects the whole sty, 219

  A melon and a woman are hard to know (or choose), 18, 219

  A merry host makes merry guests, 316

  A merry life forgets father and mother, 28

  A mewing cat is never a good mouser, 223

  A mild sheep is sucked by every lamb, 119

  A modest dog seldom grows fat, 397

  A monkey remains a monkey, though dressed in silk, 203

  A Montgomery division: all on one side, nothing on the other, 44

  A morsel eaten gains no friend, 269

  A morsel eaten selfishly does not gain a friend, 205

  A muffled cat never caught a mouse, 27, 99

  A mule and a woman do what is expected of them, 227

  A nail secures the horse-shoe, the shoe the horse, the horse the man,
  the man the castle, and the castle the whole land, 144

  A naughty child must be roughly rocked, 394

  A near neighbour is better than a distant cousin, 97

  A necessary lie is harmless, 143

  A neighbour’s eye is full of jealousy, 393

  A new broom is good for three days, 100

  A new net won’t catch an old bird, 124

  A noble prince or king never has a coin to bless himself, 62

  A north wind has no corn, and a poor man no friend, 259

  A pack of cards is the devil’s prayer-book, 156

  A pair of light shoes is not all that is wanted for dancing, 357

  A peasant between two lawyers is like a fish between two
  cats—(Catalan), 202

  A peg for every hole, 7

  A penny in time is as good as a dollar, 366

  A penny saved is a penny gained, 145

  A penny saved is twopence got, 142

  A penny spared is a penny saved, 247

  A penny spared is better than a florin gained, 316

  A pet child has many names, 381

  A pig bought on credit grunts all the year, 242

  A pig on credit makes a good winter and a bad spring, 268

  A pig’s life, short and sweet, 63

  A pig’s tail will never make a good arrow, 212

  A plaster house, a horse at grass, and a friend in words, are all mere
  glass, 314

  A pleasant companion on a journey is as good as a postchaise, 14

  A pleasant thing never comes too soon, 362

  A plough that worketh, shines; but still water stinks, 315

  A poor man has few acquaintances, 368

  A poor man is all schemes, 224

  A poor man is hungry after eating, 279

  A poor man’s joy has much alloy, 368

  A Portuguese apprentice who can’t sew, yet would be cutting out, 200

  A priest’s pocket is not easily filled, 395

  A promise is a debt, 172

  A proud pauper and a rich miser are contemptible beings, 75

  A ragged coat finds little credit, 74

  A ragged colt may make a handsome horse, 38, 272

  A ragged sack holds no grain, a poor man is not taken into counsel,
  124

  A rash man, a skin of good wine, and a glass vessel, do not last long,
  279

  A reconciled friend is a twofold enemy, 199

  A resolute heart endures no counsel, 273

  A restive morsel needs a spur of wine, 3

  A rich child often sits in a poor mother’s lap, 394

  A rich man is never ugly in the eyes of a girl, 62

  A rich widow weeps with one eye and laughs with the other, 268

  A rich wife is a source of quarrel, 396

  A rickety chair will not long serve as a seat, 392

  A rod is better than a fox’s brush, 396

  A rolling stone gathers no moss, 45, 120, 174, 240, 291, 315

  A royal heart is often hid under a tattered cloak, 393

  A runaway horse punishes himself, 77

  A runaway monk never speaks well of his convent, 316

  A sack full of fleas is easier to watch than a woman, 143

  A sack is best tied before it is full, 42

  A sack was never so full but it could hold another grain, 33, 113

  A sad bride makes a glad wife, 313

  A saddle fits more backs than one, 130

  A scabby colt may make a good horse, 212

  A scabby head fears the comb, 315

  A scald head needs strong lye, 357

  A scalded cat dreads cold water, 13, 278

  A scalded dog thinks cold water hot, 65

  A scorpion never stung me but I cured myself with its grease, 113

  A seat in the council is honour without profit, 288

  A secret between two is God’s secret, a secret between three is
  everybody’s, 242

  A secret imparted is no longer a secret, 125

  A servant and a cock must be kept but one year, 289

  A sharp tooth for hard bread, 200, 266

  A sheep’s bite is never more than skin deep, 110

  A shock dog is starved and nobody believes it, 240

  A short cut is often a wrong cut, 370

  A short halter for a greedy horse, 194

  A short mass and a long dinner, 14

  A short rest is always good, 384

  A short sword for a brave man, 7

  A short tail won’t keep off flies, 89

  A shut mouth keeps me out of strife, 269

  A sick man sleeps, but not a debtor, 215

  A silent man’s words are not brought into court, 400

  A silly song may be sung in many ways, 368

  A silver hammer breaks an iron door, 62

  A sin concealed is half pardoned (meaning when care is taken to
  conceal the scandal), 45, 119

  A sin confessed is half forgiven, 119, 130

  A single day grants what a whole year denies, 312

  A single penny fairly got, is worth a thousand that are not, 144

  A single stroke don’t fell the oak, 173

  A slight suspicion may destroy a good repute, 396

  A slothful man never has time, 131

  A small bolt to the house is better than none at all, 350

  A small cloud may hide both sun and moon, 367

  A small fire that warms you, is better than a large one that burns
  you, 366

  A small hatchet fells a great oak, 291

  A smart coat is a good letter of introduction, 317

  A smooth tongue is better than smooth locks, 350

  A soft answer turneth away wrath, 316

  A solitary man is either a brute or an angel, 131

  A son-in-law’s friendship is a winter’s sun, 199

  A sow is always dreaming of bran, 59

  A sow may find an acorn as well as a hog, 366

  A sow prefers bran to roses, 60

  A sparrow in the hand is better than a bustard on the wing, 231

  A sparrow in the hand is better than a crane on the wing, 62

  A sparrow in the hand is better than a pigeon on the roof, 144

  A sparrow in the hand is better than a pigeon on the wing, 39

  A sparrow suffers as much when it breaks its leg as does a Flanders
  horse, 366

  A spot shows most on the finest cloth, 221

  A starved town is soon forced to surrender, 88

  A stepmother has a hard hand, 356

  A stick is a peacemaker, 7

  A stick is soon found to beat a dog, 128

  A still sow eats up all the draff, 307

  A stingy man is always poor, 20

  A stout heart tempers adversity, 89, 270, 320

  A Sunday’s child never dies of the plague, 50

  A table friend is changeable, 3

  A tender-hearted mother makes a scabby daughter, 38, 106

  A thankless man never does a thankful deed, 400

  A thief makes opportunity, 312

  A thief seldom grows rich by thieving, 142

  A thief thinks every man steals, 402

  A thing done has a head (The exultation of an ancient sculptor on his
  satisfactorily completing the head of his statue), 89

  A thing is never much talked of but there is some truth in it, 114

  A thing is not bad if well understood, 142

  A thing lost is a thing known, 13

  A thing too much seen is little prized, 13

  A thorn comes into the world point foremost, 33

  A thousand probabilities do not make one truth, 110

  A threatened buffet is never well given, 125

  A threatened man lives long, if he can get bread, 383

  A threatened man lives longer than one that is hanged, 132

  A threatened man lives seven years, 312

  A timid man has little chance, 395

  A tottering man must lean upon a staff, 399

  A tree often transplanted is never loaded with fruit, 69

  A tree often transplanted neither grows nor thrives, 240

  A true gentleman would rather have his clothes torn than mended, 224

  A truth-teller finds the doors closed against him, 363

  A truth-telling woman has few friends, 397

  A turn of the key is better than the conscience of a friar, 232

  A used plough shines, standing water stinks, 149

  A usurer, a miller, a banker, and a publican, are the four evangelists
  of Lucifer, 316

  A vagabond monk never spoke well of his convent, 110

  A vicious colt may make a good horse, 38

  A vicious dog must be tied short, 3

  A voluntary burthen is no burthen, 77

  A well-formed figure needs no cloak, 273

  A well-wisher sees from afar, 246

  A white wall is the fool’s paper, 39, 110

  A wicked dog must be tied short, 38

  A willing helper does not wait until he is asked, 366

  A wise man, a strong man, 176

  A wise man and a fool together, know more than a wise man alone, 125

  A wise man does at first what a fool must do at last, 123

  A wise man may learn of a fool, 62

  A wolf hankers after sheep even at his last gasp (The ruling passion
  strong in death), 316

  A woman and a glass are always in danger, 144, 227

  A woman and a hen are soon lost through gadding, 265

  A woman and a melon are hard to choose, 18, 219

  A woman conceals only what she does not know, 61, 144

  A woman laughs when she can, and weeps when she pleases, 18

  A woman may be ever so old, if she take fire she will jump, 346

  A woman strong in flounces is weak in the head, 145

  A woman’s first counsel is the best, 362

  A woman’s in pain, a woman’s in woe, a woman is ill when she likes to
  be so, 93

  A woman’s tears and a dog’s limping are not real, 235

  A woman’s tongue is her sword and she does not let it rust, 29

  A woman’s vengeance knows no bounds, 176

  A woman who accepts, sells herself; a woman who gives, surrenders, 18

  A woman who looks much in the glass spins but little, 18

  A woman who loves to be at the window is like a bunch of grapes on the
  wayside, 93

  A word and a stone once let go cannot be recalled, 239, 267

  A word from the mouth, a stone from the hand (A word and a blow), 239,
  291

  A word once out flies everywhere, 44

  A word is enough to the wise, 149, 270

  A wound foreseen pains the less, 120

  A wound never heals so well that the scar cannot be seen, 346

  A wreck on shore is a beacon at sea, 316

  A young angel, an old devil, 15

  A young ewe and an old ram, every year bring forth a lamb, 314

  A young foal and an old horse draw not well together, 402

  A young wife is an old man’s post-horse to the grave, 156

  Abbot of Carçuela, you eat up the pot and ask for the pipkin, 193

  About the King and the Inquisition, hush!, 209

  Absence is a foe to love; away from the eyes, away from the heart, 204

  Absence is a foe to love; out of sight out of mind, 73

  Absent, none without blame; present, none without excuse, 1, 233

  Abstinence and fasting cure many a complaint, 369

  According to his pinions the bird flies, 396

  According to the arm be the bleeding, 56

  According to the custom of Aragon, good service, bad guerdon, 194

  According to the worth of the man is the worth of his land, 58

  Act honestly, and answer boldly, 370

  Act so in the valley, that you need not fear those who stand on the
  hill, 370

  Adam got a hoe, and Eve got a spinning-wheel, and thence came all our
  nobles, 346

  Adam must have an Eve to blame for his own faults, 133

  Adversity makes a man wise, 63

  Advice after the mischief is like medicine after death, 395

  Advice is not compulsion, 166

  Advice should precede the act, 166

  Advice to a fool goes in at one ear and out at the other, 351

  Advisers are not givers, 337

  Advisers are not the payers, 34

  Advising is easier than helping, 166

  Advising is often better than fighting, 166

  After a feast a man scratches his head, 4

  After a thrifty father, a prodigal son, 200

  After breaking my head you bring plaister, 213

  After Christmas comes Lent, 163

  After death the doctor, 4

  After dinner stand a while, or walk nearly half a mile, 163

  After ebb comes flood, and friends with good, 334

  After great droughts come great rains, 335

  After high floods come low ebbs, 335

  After honour and state follow envy and hate, 334

  After meat comes mustard, 168, 334

  After me the deluge, 4

  After mischance every one is wise, 4

  After one loss come many, 4

  After one pope another is made, 93

  After one that earns comes one that wastes, 365

  After one vice a greater follows, 259

  After pleasant scratching comes unpleasant smarting, 365

  After rain comes sunshine, 4, 134, 163, 334, 335

  After shaving there’s nothing to shear, 4, 93, 275

  After stuffing pears within, drink old wine till they swim, 258

  After the act wishing is in vain, 4

  After the daughter is married, then come sons-in-law in plenty, 47

  After the house is finished, he deserts it, 213

  After the sour comes the sweet, 335

  After the vintage, baskets, 213

  Age is a sorry travelling companion, 346

  Age makes many a man whiter, but not better, 346

  Alas! father, another daughter is born to you, 223

  Alas for the son whose father went to heaven, 278

  All are brave when the enemy flies, 129

  All are not asleep who have their eyes shut, 147

  All are not cooks who carry long knives, 147, 325, 352

  All are not free who mock their chains, 147

  All are not hunters that blow the horn, 40, 147, 352

  All are not friends who smile on you, 325

  All are not princes who ride with the emperor, 345

  All are not saints who go to church, 115

  All are not soldiers who go to the wars, 237, 286

  All are not thieves whom the dogs bark at, 163

  All beginnings are hard, said the thief, and began by stealing an
  anvil, 296

  All bite the bitten dog, 263

  All but saves many a man, 393

  All cats are not to be set down for witches, 23

  All clouds do not rain, 297

  All cocks must have a comb, 297

  All covet, all lose, 86, 299

  All do not beg for one saint, 237

  All do not bite that show their teeth, 345

  All flesh is not venison, 59

  All freight lightens, said the skipper, when he threw his wife
  overboard, 133

  All hairy skins must not be singed, 389

  All heads are not sense-boxes, 59

  All in the way of joke the wolf goes to the ass, 206

  All is luck or ill luck in this world, 26

  All is not butter that comes from the cow, 112

  All is not gold that glitters, 59, 118, 146, 286, 322, 324

  All is not lost that is delayed, 11

  All is not lost that is in danger, 237

  All is well: for if the bride has not fair hair, she has a fair skin,
  297

  All’s well that ends well, 120, 145, 322, 391

  All keys hang not at one woman’s girdle, 347—_see_ All the keys, &c.

  All leaf and no fruit, 256

  All my goods are of silver and gold, even my copper kettles, says the
  boaster, 329

  All offices are greasy (_i.e._ open to receive what the Dutch call
  smear-money, a term derived from the fee paid for greasing
  wheels), 296

  All roads lead to Rome (There are more ways to the wood than one), 129

  All saints do not work miracles, 129

  All ships leak: some midships, some in the bows, some in the hold, 116

  All state, and nothing on the plate, 59

  All tastes are tastes (There’s no disputing about tastes), 129

  All that’s fair must fade, 74

  All the brains are not in one head, 129

  All the fingers are not alike, 129

  All the keys don’t hang at one girdle, 59, 129, 141, 347

  All the sheep are not for the wolf, 115

  All things of this world are nothing, unless they have reference to
  the next, 259

  All threateners don’t fight, 312

  All too good is every man’s fool (He that makes himself a sheep will
  be eaten by the wolf), 299

  All truths are not fit to be uttered, 59

  All water runs to the sea, 116

  All who snore are not asleep, 357

  All wish to live long, but not to be called old, 347

  All women are good Lutherans, they would rather preach than hear mass,
  347

  All wooers are rich, and all captives poor, 133

  All wool is hair, more or less, 292

  Almost kills no man, 393

  Almost never killed a fly, 135

  Alms do not empty the purse, and a mass does not exhaust the day’s
      duty, 347

  Alone in counsel, alone in sorrow, 365

  Always in love, never married, 59

  Always say no, and you will never be married, 16

  Always something new, seldom something good, 153

  Always taking out, and never putting in, soon reaches the bottom, 194

  Always talk big and you will never be forgotten, 16

  Always to be sparing is always to be in want, 347

  Among men of honour a word is a bond, 99

  Among thorns grow roses, 72

  An ambassador beareth no blame, 70

  An amen clerk, 255

  An angry man heeds no counsel, 279

  An ape, a priest, and a louse, are three devils in one house, 312

  An ape’s an ape, though he wear a gold ring, 312

  An apothecary need not be long a cuckold, 60

  An art requires a whole man, 61

  An ass does not hit himself twice against the same stone, 313

  An ass does not stumble twice over the same stone, 60

  An ass let him be who brays at an ass, 203

  An ass’s tail will not make a sieve, 88

  An ass’s trot does not last long, 128

  An ass with her colt goes not straight to the mill, 202

  An easy shepherd makes the wolf void wood, 3

  An eel escapes from a good fisherman, 1

  An egg is an egg, said the boor, and took the goose’s egg, 142, 313

  An empty purse, and a finished house, make a man wise, but too late,
  269

  An empty sack won’t stand upright, 124, 144

  An enemy does not sleep, 7

  An ennobled peasant does not know his own father, 313

  An estate inherited is the less valued, 277

  An evil deed has a witness in the bosom, 394

  An evil eye can see no good, 395

  An honest man does not make himself a dog for the sake of a bone, 370

  An honest man is not the worse because a dog barks at him, 348

  An honest man’s word is as good as the king’s, 279

  An honest man’s word is his bond, 313

  An hour of play discovers more than a year of conversation, 281

  An idle brain is the devil’s workshop, 162

  An idle man is the devil’s bolster, 131, 314

  An ill-tempered dog has a scarred nose, 380

  An ill-tempered woman is the devil’s door-nail, 394

  An inch in a sword, or a palm in a lance, is a great advantage, 211

  An inch too short is as bad as an ell, 313

  An indulgent mother makes a sluttish daughter, 313

  An innocent heart suspects no guile, 273

  An oak is not felled at one blow, 213, 261

  An old ape never made a pretty grimace, 41

  An old coachman loves the crack of the whip, 138, 315

  An old dog does not bark for nothing, 63, 76

  An old dog does not grow used to the collar, 77

  An old flag is an honour to its captain, 74

  An old fool is worse than a young simpleton, 370

  An old fox doesn’t go twice into the trap, 142, 315

  An old horse for a young soldier, 68

  An old man’s sayings are seldom untrue, 370

  An old mule with a golden bridle (_we say_, An old ewe dressed
  lamb-fashion), 315

  An old oven is easier to heat than a new one, 63

  An old ox makes a straight furrow, 63, 75, 206, 270

  An old quarrel is easily renewed, 89

  An old rat easily finds a hole, 315

  An old rat won’t go into the trap, 315

  An old wolf is not scared by loud cries, 370

  An old wolf is used to be shouted at, 315

  An open box tempts an honest man, 284

  An open door tempts a saint, 242

  Another man’s burden is always light, 384

  Another man’s horse and your own spurs outrun the wind, 148

  Another man’s horse and your own whip can do a great deal, 365

  Another man’s trade costs money, 288

  Another year will bring another Christmas, 367

  Another’s bread costs dear, 239, 291

  Another’s care hangs by a hair, 210

  Another’s misfortune does not cure my pain, 282

  Another’s misfortune is only a dream, 37

  An ounce of discretion is better than a pound of knowledge, 131

  An ounce of favour goes further (or is worth more) than a pound of
  justice, 61

  An ounce of luck is worth a pound of wisdom, 39

  An ounce of mother-wit is worth a pound of school-wit, 143

  An ounce of patience is worth a pound of brains, 315

  An ounce of state to a pound of gold, 238

  An ox and an ass don’t yoke well to the same plough, 315

  An unasked excuse infers transgression, 107

  An unpleasant guest is as welcome as salt to a sore eye, 394

  Anger hears no counsel, 191

  Anger increases love, 125

  Anger is a short madness, 320

  Anger without power is folly (Anger can’t stand, without a strong
  hand), 191

  Anoint a villain and he will prick you, prick a villain and he will
  anoint you, 41

  Any excuse is good if it hold good, 117

  Anything for a quiet life, 69

  Any water will put out fire, 59, 116

  Apes remain apes, though you clothe them in velvet, 133

  Appearances are deceitful, 167

  Appetite comes with eating, 30, 110

  Are there not spots on the sun? 35

  Argus at home, a mole abroad, 104

  Arms and money require good hands, 202

  Arms carry peace, 107

  Arms, women, and books should be looked at daily, 342

  Arrange your cloak as the wind blows, 38

  Art and knowledge bring bread and honour, 383

  Art holds fast when all else is lost, 157

  Art is art, even though unsuccessful, 383

  As a man dresses so is he esteemed, 396

  As a man eats, so he works (Quick at meat, quick at work), 187

  As a thing is used, so it brightens, 187

  As are the times, so are the manners, 243

  As fast as laws are devised, their evasion is contrived, 169

  As for friars, live with them, eat with them, and walk with them;
  then sell them as they do themselves, 223

  As fortune is sought, so it is found (Good luck, with good looking
  after! _or_, As you make your bed, so you must lie on it), 188

  As is the king, so are his people, 243

  As is the lover, so is the beloved, 122

  As is the master so are his men (Like master, like man), 398

  As is the master, so is his dog, 243

  As long as I was a daughter-in-law I never had a good mother-in-law,
  and as long as I was a mother-in-law I never had a good
  daughter-in-law, 221

  As old as the itch, 261

  As poor as a church mouse, 121

  As princes fiddle, subjects must dance, 175

  As soon as man is born he begins to die, 154

  As soon dies the calf as the cow, 6

  As the abbot sings, the sacristan responds, 209

  As the field, so the crops; as the father, so the sons, 187

  As the labour, so the pay (No pains, no gains), 187

  As the man is, so is his speech, 398

  As the man is worth, his land is worth, 58

  As the master, so the work, 187

  As the mistress, so the maid (Hackney mistress, Hackney maid), 187

  As the old birds sing, the young ones twitter, 187, 398

  As the tree, so the fruit, 187

  As the tree, so the fruit; as the mistress; so the maid, 187

  As the virtue in the tree, such is the fruit, 352

  As the wind so the sail (Set your sail to the wind), 56

  As they pipe to me, I will dance, 273

  As useless as monkey’s fat, 212

  As water runs towards the shore, so does money towards the rich man’s
  hand, 347

  As won, so spent (Lightly come, lightly go), 187

  As you began the dance you may pay the piper, 319

  As you make your bed so you must lie on it, 13, 187, 250, 398

  As you sow, you shall reap, 187, 345

  As you would have a daughter so choose a wife, 122

  Ask advice of your equals, help of your superiors, 398

  Ask my chum if I am a thief, 93

  Ask my comrade, who is as great a liar as myself, 15

  Ask not after a good man’s pedigree, 196

  Ask too much to get enough, 239

  Ask which was born first, the hen or the egg, 93

  Asking costs little, 102

  Assertion is no proof, 135

  Asses carry the oats and horses eat them, 304

  Asses must not be tied up with horses, 23

  Asses sing badly because they pitch their voices too high, 147

  Associate with the good and you will be one of them, 66, 197

  At a bridge, a plank, or a river, the servant foremost, the master
  behind, 63

  At a dangerous passage yield precedence, 76

  At a great river be the last to pass, 68

  At a good bargain pause and ponder, 65

  At a little fountain one drinks at one’s ease, 4

  At an ambuscade of villains a man does better with his feet than his
  hands, 194

  At an auction keep your mouth shut, 221

  At an open chest the righteous sins, 68

  At borrowing cousin german, at repaying son of a whore, 6

  At court there are many hands, but few hearts, 191

  At court they sell a good deal of smoke without fire, 401

  At evening the sluggard is busy, 133

  At last the foxes all meet at the furrier’s, 129

  At night all cats are grey, 191, 212, 274

  At Rome do as Rome does, 5

  At Shrovetide every one has need of his frying-pan, 1

  At table bashfulness is out of place, 73

  At the end of the game we see who wins, 69

  At the end the Gloria is chanted, 196

  At the king’s court every one for himself, 17

  At the wars do as they do at the wars, 3

  At the wedding-feast the least eater is the bride, 221

  Avarice bursts the bag, 31

  Avoid a friend who covers you with his wings and destroys you with
  his beak, 254

  Away from the battle all are soldiers (Of war all can tattle, away
  from the battle), 176

  Away with thee, sickness, to where they make a good pillow for thee,
  197

  “Away with you, be a pedlar, a knave,” says the hangman to his man,
  149


  B.

  Bachelor, a peacock; betrothed, a lion; married, an ass, 258

  Bad bird, bad egg, 136

  “Bad company,” said the thief, as he went to the gallows between the
  hangman and a monk, 331

  Bad egg, bad chick, 331

  Bad eyes never see any good, 136

  Bad grass does not make good hay, 92

  Bad is never good until worse happens, 394

  Bad is the sack that will not bear patching, 77

  Bad is the wool that cannot be died, 77

  Bad money always comes back, 167

  Bad news always comes too soon, 171

  Bad news has wings, 35

  Bad news is always true, 228

  Bad news is the first to come, 108

  Bad ware is never cheap, 42

  Bad ware must be cried up, 136

  Bad watch often feeds the wolf, 29

  Bargains are costly, 190, 229

  Barking dogs don’t bite, 13, 135, 301

  Bashfulness is of no use to the needy, 306

  Baskets after the vintage, 275

  Be a custom good or bad, a peasant will have it continue in force, 210

  Be a horse ever so well shod, he may slip, 25

  Be merry, Shrovetide, for to-morrow thou wilt be ashes, 196

  Be my enemy and go to my mill, 256

  Be not a baker if your head is butter, 237

  Be not an esquire where you were a page, 214

  Be not ashamed of your craft, 167

  Be silent, or say something better than silence, 168

  Be the horse good or bad always wear your spurs, 66

  Be the thing you would be called (Be as you would seem to be), 169

  Be truly what thou wouldst be thought to be, 57

  Bear and bull catch no fox, 135

  Bear patiently that which thou sufferest by thine own fault, 341

  Beat the churl and he will be your friend, 74

  Beauty and folly are often companions, 7, 75

  Beauty carries its dower in its face, 352

  Beauty is a good letter of introduction, 141

  Beauty is but dross if honesty be lost, 337

  Beauty without virtue is like a rose without scent, 367

  Bees do not become hornets, 33

  Before a man learns to hang he is half dead, 368

  Before the time great courage; when at the point, great fear, 200

  Before you make a friend, eat a peck of salt with him, 296

  Before you marry, beware, for it is a knot difficult to untie, 200

  Before you marry consider what you do, 292

  Before you marry, have a house to live in, fields to till, and vines
  to cut, 200

  Before you marry reflect, for it is a knot you cannot untie, 266

  Before you mount, look to the girth, 317

  Beggars must not be choosers, 201

  Beginning and ending shake hands, 134

  Begun is half done, 135

  Behind every mountain lies a vale, 296

  Believe a boaster as you would a liar, 89

  Believe that, and drink some water (to wash it down), 14

  Belles are not for the beaux, 34

  Bells call to church but do not enter, 34

  Bend the willow while it is young, 120, 390

  Better a bird in the hand than ten in the air, 301

  Better a blind horse than an empty halter, 300

  Better a distant good than a near evil, 281

  Better a good dinner than a fine coat, 38

  Better a friendly denial than an unwilling compliance, 135

  Better a friend’s bite than an enemy’s caress, 350

  Better a lean agreement than a fat lawsuit, 97, 135—_see_ A bad or a
  lean, &c.

  Better a leg broken than the neck, 300

  Better a little in peace and with right, than much with anxiety and
  strife, 351

  Better a living dog than a dead lion, 135

  Better a near neighbour than a distant cousin, 110

  Better a patch than a hole, 135

  Better a poor horse than an empty stall. Better half a loaf than none
  at all. Better a little furniture than an empty house, 350

  Better a red face than a black heart, 283

  Better a ruined than a lost land, 39, 300

  Better a salt herring on your own table, than a fresh pike on
  another’s, 349

  Better a slip of the foot than the tongue, 39

  Better a sparrow in the hand than two flying, 283

  Better afield with the birds than hanging on lords, 301

  Better alone than in bad company, 96, 135, 232, 282, 300

  Better an ass that carries me than a horse that throws me, 281

  Better an open enemy than a false friend, 349

  Better an unjust peace than a just war (Better a lean peace than a
  fat victory), 171

  Better anticipate than be anticipated, 283

  Better ask than go astray, 96

  Better ask twice than lose your way once, 358

  Better aught than nought, 110, 147

  Better badly mounted than proud on foot, 167

  Better be a bird of the wood than a bird in the cage, 96

  Better be a coward than foolhardy, 38

  Better be a free bird than a captive king, 349

  Better be carried by an ass than thrown by a horse, 300

  Better be convinced by words than by blows, 358

  Better be envied than pitied, 27, 38, 96, 300

  Better be killed by robbers than by the kick of an ass, 266

  Better be mad with all the world than wise alone, 26

  Better be one-eyed than quite blind, 283

  Better be silent than talk ill, 281

  Better be the head of a cat than the tail of a lion, 96

  Better be the head of a dog than the tail of a lion, 38

  Better be the head of a lizard than the tail of a dragon, 96

  Better be the head of a rat than the tail of a lion (Better rule in
  hell, than serve in heaven), 231

  Better be wrong with the many than right with the few, 283

  Better beg than steal, 322

  Better belly burst than good victuals spoil, 300

  Better bend than break, 97, 159, 232, 283

  Better blow hard than burn yourself, 349

  Better coarse cloth than naked thighs, 350

  Better come late to church than never, 349

  Better cross an angry man than a fasting man, 358

  Better deny at once than promise long, 350

  Better deserve honour and not have it, than have it and not deserve
  it, 282

  Better envy than pity, 159

  Better fall from the window than the roof, 96

  Better fed than taught, 38

  Better free in a foreign land than a serf at home, 135

  Better gain in mud than lose in gold, 121, 281

  Better give nothing than stolen alms, 136

  Better give than have to give, 96

  Better give the wool than the sheep, 96

  Better go about than be drowned, 231, 281

  Better go to bed supperless than run in debt, 136

  Better half an egg than empty shells, 135, 301

  Better have a bad ass than be your own ass, 232, 282

  Better have a dog for your friend than your enemy (Better a dog fawn
  on you than bite you), 301

  Better have an egg to-day than a hen to-morrow, 96

  Better have a friend on the road than gold or silver in your purse, 38

  Better have friends in the market-place than money in your coffer, 281

  Better have one bee than a host of flies, 96

  Better have something yourself than beg of your sister, 350

  Better have to give than have to beg, 283

  Better in an old carriage than in a new ship, 350

  Better is a leap over the ditch than the entreaties of good men, 282

  Better is an enemy to good, 102, 136

  Better is better, 135

  Better is my neighbour’s hen than mine, 283

  Better is rule than rent, 231

  Better is the branch that bends, than the branch that breaks, 350

  Better is the smoke of my own house than the fire of another’s, 231

  Better keep peace than make peace, 301

  Better keep than have to beg, 281

  Better late than never, 39, 97, 110, 232, 282, 301, 351

  Better lose than lose more, 282

  Better lose the anchor than the whole ship, 301

  Better lose the saddle than the horse, 97

  Better lose the wool than the sheep, 39

  Better lose your labour than your time in idleness, 335

  Better make a short circuit than wet your hose, 343

  Better mine than ours, 283

  Better no law, than law not enforced, 350

  Better on the heath with an old cart than at sea in a new ship, 301

  Better once in heaven than ten times at the gate, 301

  Better once than never, 97

  Better one-eyed than stone blind, 135, 232

  Better one eye-witness than ten hearsay witnesses, 300

  Better one living word than a hundred dead ones, 135

  Better one “Take this,” than two “I will give you,” 232, 281

  Better poor on land than rich at sea, 300

  Better poor with honour than rich with shame, 300

  Better reap two days too soon than one too late, 332

  Better repair the gutter than the whole house, 283

  Better return half way than lose yourself, 301

  Better ride a good horse for a year, than an ass all your life, 301

  Better slip with the foot than with the tongue, 97

  Better something on the arm than all in the stomach, 351

  Better something than nothing at all, 136

  Better spare at the brim than at the bottom, 349

  Better squinting than blind, 301

  Better straw, than nothing, 283

  Better stretch your hand than your neck (Better beg than steal), 300

  Better stumble once than be always tottering, 27

  Better suffer a known evil than change for uncertain good, 231

  Better suffer for truth, than prosper by falsehood, 349

  Better the child cry, than the mother sigh, 349

  Better the child cry than the old man, 349

  Better the world should know you as a sinner than God know you as a
  hypocrite, 349

  Better, There he goes, than There he hangs, 135

  Better there should be too much than too little, 231

  Better they should say, “There he ran away,” than “There he died,” 231

  Better to be a free bird than a captive king, 349

  Better twice measured than once wrong, 350

  Better twice remembered than once forgotten, 324

  Better walk before a hen than behind an ox, 39

  Better walk on wooden legs than be carried on a wooden bier, 351

  Better walk unshackled in a green meadow than be bound to a
  thornbush, 349

  Better weak beer than an empty cask, 350

  Better where birds sing than where irons ring, 301

  Better whole than patched with gold, 350

  Between a woman’s “Yes” and “No” there is no room for the point of a
  needle, 192

  Between evil tongues and evil ears, there is nothing to choose, 394

  Between neighbours’ gardens a hedge is not amiss, 192

  Between promising and giving a man should marry his daughter, 17

  Between saying and doing many a pair of shoes is worn out, 99

  Between saying and doing there is a long road, 211, 390

  Between smith and smith no money passes, 211, 274

  Between the hammer and the anvil, 192, 339

  Between the hand and the mouth the soup is often spilt (’Twixt the
  cup and the lip there’s many a slip), 15, 90, 173, 211, 274

  Between two cowards, he has the advantage who first detects the
  other, 128

  Between two friends, a notary and two witnesses, 222

  Between two sharpers, the sharpest, 211

  Between two stools the breech comes to the ground, 17, 339

  Between wording and working is a long road, 173

  Between wrangling and disputing truth is lost, 190

  Beware, froth is not beer, 397

  Beware of a bad woman, and put no trust in a good one, 211, 273

  Beware of a door that has many keys, 285

  Beware of a man that does not talk, and of a dog that does not bark,
  279

  Beware of a pledge that eats, 291

  Beware of a poor alchemist, 100

  Beware of a reconciled friend as of the devil, 210

  Beware of a reconciled enemy (Take heed of an enemy reconciled), 22

  Beware of a white Spaniard and a black Englishman, 336

  Beware of “Had I but known,” 100

  Beware of him who makes you presents, 90

  Beware of laughing hosts and weeping priests, 174

  Beware of one who has nothing to lose, 100

  Beware of the dog himself, his shadow does not bite, 402

  Beware of the dog that does not bark, 272

  Beware of the man of two faces, 342

  Beware of the vinegar of sweet wine, 100

  Biding makes thriving, 301

  Big churches, little saints, 151

  Big fish devour the little ones, 321

  Big fish spring out of the kettle, 320

  Big flies break the spider’s web, 104

  Big head, little wit, 19, 140

  Big mouthfuls often choke, 100

  Big words seldom go with good deeds, 399

  Bird never flew so high but it had to come to the ground for food, 302

  Birds of a feather flock together, 173, 341

  Birds of prey do not flock together, 276

  Birds of prey do not sing, 166

  Bite me not, my name is little grizzle; had I a little tail I should
  be a little lion, 301

  Bite not the dog that bites, 388

  Bite the biter, 283

  Bitter pills are gilded, 136

  Black cows give white milk, 168

  Black hens lay white eggs, 313

  Blacksmith’s children are not afraid of sparks, 398

  Blame is the lazy man’s wages, 354

  Bleed him, purge him, and if he dies, bury him, 256, 299

  Blessed is the misfortune that comes alone, 75

  Blessings on him that said, Face about, 206

  Blood boils without fire, 228

  Blood is thicker than water, 136

  Blossoms are not fruits, 301

  Blow, smith, and you’ll get money, 258

  Blows are not given upon conditions, 101

  Boldly ventured is half won, 148

  Borderers are either thieves or murderers, 99

  Borrowers must not be choosers, 23

  Borrowing brings care (He that goes a borrowing goes a sorrowing), 302

  Borrowing does well only once, 136

  Both legs in the stocks or only one, ’tis all the same, 161

  Brackish water is sweet in a drought, 264

  Bread in one hand, a stone in the other, 154

  Bread is better than the song of birds, 349

  Bring up a raven and he will peck out your eyes, 16, 145

  Broad thongs may be cut from other men’s leather, 91

  Broken friendship may be soldered but can never be made sound, 265

  Build golden bridges for the flying foe, 137

  But for all that the honest man has not got his purse, 10

  Butter spoils no meat, and moderation injures no cause, 398

  Buy the bed of a great debtor, 88

  Buy when it is market time, 160

  Buy your greyhound, don’t rear him, 278

  Buy your neighbour’s ox, and woo your neighbour’s daughter, 156

  Buyers want a hundred eyes, sellers only one, 156

  Buying is cheaper than asking, 156

  By beating love decays, 6

  By candlelight a goat looks like a lady, 2

  By dint of going wrong all will come right, 2

  By falling we learn to go safely, 334

  By gnawing skin a dog learns to eat leather, 346

  By going gains the mill, and not by standing still, 266

  By labour fire is got out of a stone, 334

  By lamplight every country wench seems handsome, 70

  By night all cats are grey, 30, 92, 135, 301

  By slow degrees the bird builds his nest, 331

  By telling our woes we often assuage them, 5

  By the living we bury the dead, 334

  By the street of “By-and-by” one arrives at the house of “Never,” 241

  By the thread we unwind the skein, 241

  By their marks the bales are known, 72

  By working in the smithy one becomes a smith, 17


  C.

  Cabbage for cabbage, 13

  Call me not fortunate till you see me buried, 236

  Call me not olive till you see me gathered, 113, 236

  Call not the devil, he will come fast enough unbidden, 382

  Cap in hand never did any harm, 75

  Care, and not fine stables, makes a good horse, 374

  Care brings on grey hairs, and age without years, 169

  Caress your dog, and he’ll spoil your clothes, 338

  Carry bread in your hood to Don Garcia’s wedding, 195

  Caution is the mother of tender beer-glasses, 341

  Cent-wisdom and dollar-folly (Penny wise and pound foolish), 302

  Chairs sink and stools rise, 263

  Change yourself, and fortune will change with you, 284

  Charity begins at home, 306

  Charity gives (or bestows) itself rich, covetousness hoards itself
  poor, 138

  Charity well regulated begins at home, 226

  Chastise a good child, that it may not grow bad, and a bad one, that
  it may not grow worse, 389

  Chastise one that is worthless, and he will presently hate you, 208

  Chastise the good and he will mend, chastise the bad and he will grow
  worse, 74, 272

  Cheat me in the price and not in the goods, 221, 277

  Cheating is more honourable than stealing, 136

  Cheating is the chapman’s cart and plough, 136

  Cheerful company shortens the miles, 149

  Cheerfulness and good-will make labour light, 385

  Cheese and bread make the cheeks red, 156

  Cheese from the ewe, milk from the goat, butter from the cow, 245

  Cheese is gold in the morning, silver at noon, and lead at night, 156

  Cherries are bitter to the glutted blackbird, 3

  Children and drunken men speak the truth, 397

  Children and fools are prophets, 16

  Children and fools speak the truth, 157, 230

  Children are certain sorrow, but uncertain joy, 351

  Children are the riches of the poor, 351

  Children are what they are made, 34

  Children married, cares increased, 278

  Children tell in the highway what they hear by the fireside, 275

  Choose a Brabant sheep, a Guelder ox, a Flemish capon, and a
  Friezeland cow, 335

  Choose neither a woman nor linen by candlelight, 227

  Chop, and you will have splinters, 379

  Christians have no neighbours, 136

  Christmas comes but once a year, 111

  Christmas is talked of so long that it comes at last, 41

  Claw me, and I’ll claw thee, 157, 167, 187, 331

  Clay and lime conceal much evil, 204

  Clothes make the man, 305

  Coffee has two virtues, it is wet and warm, 330

  Cold hand, a warm heart, 156

  Colts by falling, and lads by losing, grow prudent, 242

  Come fish, come frog, all goes into the basket (All’s fish that comes
  to the net), 255

  Common fame is seldom to blame, 149

  Common fame seldom lies (_An English proverb says_, Common fame is a
  common liar), 319

  Common goods, no goods, 319

  Communities begin by building their kitchen, 13

  Company in distress makes trouble less, 51

  Comparison is not proof, 14

  Comparisons are odious, 14, 59, 104

  Conceal not your secret from your friend, or you deserve to lose him,
  263

  Confidence begets confidence, 173

  Conscience is as good as a thousand witnesses, 105

  Constant dropping wears the stone, 169

  Contrivance is better than force, 38

  Copper begets copper, and not (the labour of) men’s bones (_We say_,
  Money gets money), 208

  Correction bringeth fruit, 339

  Correction is good when administered in time, 348

  Corsair against corsair, nothing to win but empty casks, 128, 210

  Could a man foresee events he would never be poor, 52

  Could everything be done twice, everything would be done better, 157

  Counsel after action is like rain after harvest, 395

  Counsel before action, 337

  Counsel is nothing against love, 89

  Counted sheep are eaten by the wolf, 9

  Counterfeit coin passes current at night, 283

  Coupled sheep drown one another, 319

  Courtesy that is all on one side cannot last long, 14

  Cover up the pot, there’s an eel in it, 306

  Covetousness bursts the bag, 226

  Covetousness is never satisfied till its mouth is filled with earth,
  319

  Coward against coward, the assailant conquers, 212

  Cowards have no luck, 190

  Cowards’ weapons neither cut nor pierce, 107

  Crazy wheels run longest, 166

  Creaking carts last the longest, 331

  Credit is better than ready money, 150

  Credit is dead, bad pay killed it, 89

  Crooked iron may be straightened with a hammer, 383

  Crooked wood burns quite as well as straight, 157

  Crows do not peck out crows’ eyes, 273

  Cunning has little honour, 384

  Cunning men’s cloaks sometimes fall, 72

  Cunning surpasses strength, 159

  Curses are like processions: they return to whence they came, 108

  Curses on accounts with relations, 254

  Custom becomes law, 210

  Custom is second nature, 105, 150, 226, 305, 319

  Cut off the dog’s tail, he remains a dog, 127

  Cut your coat according to your cloth, 337


  D.

  Damage suffered makes you wise (or knowing), but seldom rich, 346

  Darkness and night are mothers of thought, 322

  Daughter-in-law hates mother-in-law, 169

  Daughters are easy to rear, but hard to marry, 170

  Daughters are brittle ware, 311

  Daughters may be seen but not heard, 311

  Daylight will come, though the cock do not crow, 358

  Dead dogs don’t bite, 170, 312

  Dear is cheap, and cheap is dear, 288

  Dear physic always does good, if not to the patient, at least to the
  apothecary, 170

  Dearness gluts, 13

  Dearth foreseen never came, 77

  Death does not blow a trumpet, 363

  Death is in the pot, 322

  Death keeps no almanack, 304

  Death spares neither Pope nor beggar, 294

  Deceit and treachery make no man rich, 346

  Deceive not thy physician, confessor, or lawyer, 197

  Deeds are love, and not sweet words (or fine phrases), 238, 287

  Deep draughts, and long morning slumbers, soon make a man poor, 399

  Deep swimmers and high climbers seldom die in their beds, 310

  Deferred is not annulled (Forbearance is no acquittance), 172

  Delays are dangerous, 109

  Desire beautifies what is ugly, 217

  Desperate ills require desperate remedies, 7

  Despise not a small wound, a poor kinsman, or an humble enemy, 381

  Despise your enemy and you will soon be beaten, 275

  Devils must be driven out with devils, 170

  Diamond cut diamond, 18

  Different times different manners, 70

  Diligent work makes a skilful workman, 380

  Dirty water does not wash clean, 67

  Discover not your silent money (_i.e._ your hoarded money) to
  anybody, 260

  Disputing and borrowing cause grief and sorrowing, 166

  Distrust is poison to friendship, 390

  Do as others do, and few will mock you, 368

  Do good, and care not to whom, 98, 277

  Do good to a knave, and pray God he may not do the same to thee, 370

  Do ill, and expect the like, 277

  Do not abstain from sowing for fear of the pigeons, 23

  Do not buy a carrier’s ass, or marry an innkeeper’s daughter, 230

  Do not divide the spoil till the victory is won, 140

  Do not fret for news, it will grow old and you will know it, 241

  Do not give a dog bread every time he wags his tail, 112

  Do not hang all on one nail, 152

  Do not judge of the ship from the land, 113

  Do not judge the dog by his hairs, 389

  Do not lend your money to a great man, 40

  Do not lose honour through fear, 242

  Do not make two devils of one, 23

  Do not put in more warp than you can weave, 403

  Do not rear a bird of a bad breed, 274

  Do not rejoice at my grief, for when mine is old yours will be new,
  237

  Do not ship all in one bottom, 158

  Do not spread your corn to dry at an enemy’s door (Asturian), 230

  Do not steal a loaf from him that kneads and bakes, 197

  Do not strip before bedtime, 24

  Do not stuff your servant with bread, and he won’t ask for cheese, 203

  Do not talk Arabic in the house of a Moor, 221

  Do not tell your secrets behind a wall or a hedge, 259

  Do not wade where you see no bottom, 402

  Don’t be a baker if your head is made of butter, 285 (_See_ He that
  _and_ He who)

  Don’t believe in the saint unless he works miracles, 112

  Don’t believe what you see, husband, but only what I tell you, 230

  Don’t bite till you know whether it is bread or a stone, 113

  Don’t budge, if you sit at ease, 166

  Don’t buy a cat in a bag (Don’t buy a pig in a poke), 160, 331

  Don’t carry your head too high, the door is low, 159

  Don’t cross the water unless you see the bottom, 84

  Don’t cry fried fish before they are caught, 113

  Don’t cry herrings till they are in the net, 337

  Don’t cry holloa! till you’re out of the bush, 337

  Don’t cry hurra! till you’re over the bridge (or ditch, or hedge),
  167, 168, 337

  Don’t divide the spoil before the victory is won, 160

  Don’t find fault with what you don’t understand, 40

  Don’t fly till your wings are feathered, 148

  Don’t go a-fishing to a famous stream, 68

  Don’t kill the man at the count’s desire, 222

  Don’t learn too much, Jack, else you must do a great deal, 151

  Don’t leave the high road for a short cut, 284

  Don’t make an oven of your cap or a garden of your belly, 40

  Don’t make yourself poor to one who won’t make you rich, 286

  Don’t mention the cross to the devil, 114

  Don’t play with the bear if you don’t want to be bit, 113

  Don’t pull hard enough to break the rope, 286

  Don’t put your finger into too tight a ring, 40, 115

  Don’t reckon your eggs before they are laid, 98

  Don’t reckon without your host, 160

  Don’t rely on the label of the bag, 24

  Don’t scuffle with the potter, for he makes money by the damage, 237

  Don’t sell the bearskin before the bear is dead, 333

  Don’t sell the bearskin before you have caught (or killed) the bear,
  115, 140, 341

  Don’t sell the skin till you have caught the fox, 397

  Don’t send away your cat for being a thief, 196

  Don’t show your teeth if you can’t bite, 51

  Don’t snap your fingers at the dogs before you are out of the
  village, 24

  Don’t stop the way of a bull or of a current of air, 198

  Don’t talk Latin before the Franciscans, 23

  Don’t teach fishes to swim, 23

  Don’t throw away your dirty water till you have got clean, 160

  Don’t throw away your old shoes till you have got new ones, 318

  Don’t throw the handle after the bill, 333

  Don’t yoke the plough before the horses, 333

  Do what I say well, and not what I do ill, 224

  Do what the friar says, and not what he does, 224

  Do what thou doest (Age quod agis), 170

  Do what you ought, come what may, 18, 98

  Do you carry the trough, husband, and I will carry the sieve, which
  is as heavy as the devil, 228

  Do you speak English? (_Meaning_, Have you got any money? _We used to
  say in England_, Have you got any Spanish?), 338

  Do you want better bread than wheaten? 63

  Do you want to buy cheap? Buy of a needy fool, 253

  Do you want to see a wolf with young (_i.e._ an insatiable
  plunderer)? Marry your daughter, 254

  Doctor Luther’s shoes do not fit every parish priest, 141

  Does your neighbour bore you? Lend him a sequin, 127

  Dogs bark at those they don’t know, 101

  Dogs have teeth in all countries, 328

  Dogs that bark much don’t bite, 153

  Doing nothing teaches doing ill, 164

  Dominies come for your wine, and officers for your daughters, 312

  Dread the anger of the dove, 14

  Dreams are froth (or lies), 57, 171

  Dress slowly when you are in a hurry, 19

  Dressed like a windmill, 19

  Drink nothing without seeing it, sign nothing without reading it, 284

  Drink upon salad costs the doctor a ducat; drink upon eggs costs him
  two, 144

  Drink wine and let water go to the mill, 75

  Drink wine upon figs, 258

  Drive not away what never came near you, 370

  Drop by drop fills the tub, 19

  Drop by drop wears away the stone, 19, 68

  Drop the jest when it is most amusing, 107

  Dry wood makes a quick fire, 401

  Ducats are clipped, pence are not, 141

  Dull scissors make crooked-mouthed tailors, 365

  Dumb dogs and still water are dangerous, 170

  Dung is no saint, but where it falls it works miracles, 217


  E.

  Eagles catch no fleas, 299

  Eagles do not breed doves, 133, 299

  Early marriage, long love, 148

  Early to bed and early to rise, makes a man healthy, wealthy, and
  wise, 148

  Early to rise and late to bed, lifts again the debtor’s head, 148

  Earnestness and sport go well together, 347

  East or west, home is best, 165, 336

  Easy to say is hard to do, 2

  Eat bread at pleasure, drink wine by measure, 44

  Eat bread that’s light, and cheese by weight, 302

  Eat of your own, and call yourself mine (_i. e._ Be my servant and
  find yourself), 272

  Eat with him, and beware of him, 272

  Eaten bread is soon forgotten, 103

  Eating sets the head to rights, 195

  Eating teaches drinking, 102

  Economy is a great revenue, 345

  Eggs and oaths are easily broken, 364

  Eggs are put to hatch on chance, 3

  Either fight not with priests or beat them to death, 160

  Either rich or hanged, 238

  Either the ass will die, or he that goads it, 238

  Empty casks (or vessels) make the most noise, 36, 158, 331, 401

  Empty rooms make giddy housewives, 63

  Empty waggons make most noise, 401

  Enjoy your little whilst the fool is seeking for more, 223

  Enough is as good as a feast, 319

  Enough is better than a sackful, 149

  Enough is better than too much, 38, 319

  Enough is enough, and too much spoils, 73

  Enough is great riches, 393

  Entreat him in jackass fashion; if he won’t carry the sack, give him
  a whack, 188

  Entreat the churl and the bargain is broken off, 121

  Entreaties to get him to sing, and entreaties to leave off, 254

  Entreaty and right do the deed, 254

  Envy crieth of spite where honour rideth, 335

  Envy does not enter an empty house, 348

  Envy envies itself, 163

  Envy goes beyond avarice, 17

  Envy is its own torturer, 348

  Envy was never a good spokesman, 348

  Erring is not cheating (A mistake is no fraud), 154

  Error is no payment, 97

  Escaping from the smoke he falls into the fire, 306

  Even a fly has its anger (or spleen), 71, 106

  Even a frog would bite if it had teeth, 71

  Even a hair casts its shadow, 134, 206, 270 (_See_ Every hair)

  Even a horse, though he has four feet, stumbles, 72, 76, 134, 315

  Even among the apostles there was a Judas, 72

  Even clever hens sometimes lay their eggs among nettles, 383

  Even counted sheep are eaten by the wolf, 9, 71, 140

  Even crumbs are bread, 398

  Even foxes are caught, 71

  Even hares pull a lion by the beard when he is dead, 336

  Even he gets on who is drawn by oxen, 373

  Even old foxes are caught in the snare, 72

  Even that fish may be caught that strives the hardest against it, 388

  Even the best hack stumbles once, 134 (_See_ Even a horse)

  Even the dog gets bread by wagging his tail, 72

  Even the fool says a wise word sometimes, 71

  Even the just has need of help, 71

  Even the lion must defend himself against the flies, 134

  Even the sea, great as it is, grows calm, 71

  Even woods have ears, 71

  Ever one hair, only one, and the man is bald at last, 154

  Every ant has its ire, 270 (_See_ Even a fly)

  Every beginning is hard, said the thief, when he began by stealing an
  anvil, 133, 296

  Every bird needs its own feathers, 366

  Every bird sings as it is beaked, 317

  Every bird thinks its own nest beautiful, 68

  Everybody is wise after the thing has happened, 59

  Everybody knows best where his own shoe pinches (_Also Scotch_), 156
  (_See_ Every one)

  Everybody knows good counsel except him that has need of it, 133

  Everybody must live, 22

  Everybody must wear out one pair of fool’s shoes, if he wear no more,
  156

  Everybody says it, nobody does it, 156, 375

  Everybody thinks his own cuckoo sings better than another’s
  nightingale, 155

  Everybody’s business is nobody’s business, 175

  Everybody’s companion is nobody’s friend, 156

  Everybody’s friend and nobody’s friend is all one, 199, 265

  Everybody’s friend is everybody’s fool, 156, 297, 375

  Everybody’s friend, nobody’s friend, 71

  Every cask smells of the wine it contains, 207, 270

  Every clown can find fault, though it would puzzle him to do better,
  170

  Every cock crows on his own dunghill, 207

  Every cock is valiant on his own dunghill, 284, 314

  Every country has its custom, 221

  Every day a thread makes a skein in the year, 297

  Every day has its night, 116, 366

  Every day is not a holiday, 113, 116, 324

  Every ditch is full of after-wit, 91

  Every dog is not a lion at home, 116

  Every dog is valiant in his own kennel, 13

  Every flood hath its ebb, 297

  Every fly has its shadow, 271

  Every foal is not like its sire, 368

  Every fool is pleased with his bauble, 193

  Every fool is wise when he holds his tongue, 116

  Every fool thinks he is clever enough, 366

  Every fool wants to give advice, 116

  Every fox likes a henroost, 68

  Every fox looks after his own skin, 375

  Every glowworm is not fire (Every light is not the sun), 116, 163

  Every hair casts its shadow, 134, 206, 270 (_See_ Even a hair)

  Every hare may pluck the dead lion’s mane, 137 (_See_ Even hares)

  Every hill has its valley, 116

  Every hooked beak is maintained by prey, 59

  Every house has its cross, 317

  Every labourer is worthy of his hire, 155

  Every land its own custom, every wheel its own spindle, 271

  Every law is broken to become a king, 241

  Every life has its joy, every joy its law, 376

  Every little fish expects to become a whale, 356

  Every little helps, 296

  Every little helps, said the sow, when she snapped at a gnat, 347

  Every little helps to lighten the freight, said the captain, as he
  threw his wife overboard, 296

  Every man carries an enemy in his own bosom, 365

  Every man for himself, and God for us all, 155 (_See_ Every one)

  Every man has a fool in his sleeve, 12, 88

  Every man has a good wife and a bad trade, 117

  Every man has his liking, 375

  Every man has his lot, and a wide world before him, 368

  Every man has his value, 12

  Every man his own is not too much, 317

  Every man is dearest to himself, 155

  Every man is master in his own house, 314

  Every man is the architect of his own fortune, 155, 366

  Every man is the best interpreter of his own words, 155

  Every man is the son of his own works, 207

  Every man likes his own praise best, 375

  Every man must carry his own sack to the mill, 118, 375

  Every man rides his own hobby, 147

  Every man thinks his own copper gold, 155, 366

  Every man thinks his own owl a falcon, 317

  Every man to his taste, 12

  Every man to his trade, 271

  Every medal has its reverse, 13, 116

  Every mother’s child is handsome, 156

  Every one bears his cross, 12

  Every one can navigate in fine weather, 117

  Every one counts for as much as he has, 155

  Every one draws the water to his own mill, 12, 117

  Every one feels his own burden heavy, 1

  Every one feels the cold according as he is clad, 207

  Every one finds fault with his own trade, 117

  Every one finds sin sweet and repentance bitter, 375

  Every one for himself and God for us all, 12, 117, 155, 207, 271, 317

  Every one gives himself credit for more brains than he has, and less
  money, 117

  Every one goes with his own sack to the mill, 118, 375

  Every one has his master, 145

  Every one his own is but fair, 12

  Every one in his own house, and God in all men’s, 207

  Every one is a king in his own house, 270

  Every one is a preacher under the gallows, 314

  Every one is a thief in his own craft, 317

  Every one is emperor on his own ground, 143

  Every one is wise after the event (or when the mischief is done),
  163, 213

  Every one is wise for his own profit, 271

  Every one knows best where the shoe pinches him, 12, 117, 156, 207,
  271

  Every one likes justice in another’s house, none in his own, 117

  Every one likes to wipe his shoes on poverty, 134

  Every one must pay his debt to nature, 155

  Every one must row with the oars he has, 317

  Every one praises his own saint, 117

  Every one preaches for his own saint, 12

  Every one rakes the fire under his own pot, 366

  Every one reaps as he sows, 270

  Every one says: My right is good, 12

  Every one sees his smart coat, no one sees his shrunken belly, 347

  Every one should sweep before his own door, 12

  Every one sings as he has the gift, and marries as he has the luck,
  270

  Every one sneezes as God pleases, 207

  Every one speaks as he is, 271

  Every one speaks of the feast (or fair) as he finds it, 207, 271

  Every one stretches his legs according to the length of his coverlet
  (Cut your coat according to your cloth), 207, 271

  Every one takes his flogging in his own way, 12

  Every one takes his pleasure where he finds it, 12

  Every one thinks he has more than his own share of brains, 91

  Every one thinks himself without sin because he has not that of
  others, 117

  Every one thinks his owl a falcon, 155

  Every one thinks his own cross the heaviest, 68

  Every one thinks that all the bells echo his own thoughts, 155

  Every one to his equal, 271

  Every one to his own calling, and the Ox to the plough, 117

  Every one tries to cross the fence where it is lowest, 366

  Every one wishes to bring water to his own mill, and leave his
  neighbour’s dry, 207 (_See_ Every one draws)

  Every pedlar praises his own needles, 206, 270

  Every pig has its Martinmas, 271

  Every potter praises his pot, and the more if it is cracked, 116, 207

  Every potter vaunts his own pot, 13

  Every priestling conceals a popeling, 154

  Every promise is a debt, 117

  Every road leads to Rome, 59, 259

  Every rose has its thorn, 117

  Every saint has his festival, 68

  Every shop has its trick (There are tricks in all trades), 116

  Every shot does not bring down a bird, 317

  Every ten years one man has need of another, 116

  Everything comes in time to him who can wait, 59

  Everything does not fall that totters, 59

  Everything goes by favour and cousinship, 59

  Everything goes to him who does not want it, 59

  Everything has an end—except a sausage, which has two, 347

  Everything has an end excepting God, 297

  Everything has its time, 270

  Everything has two handles (or two sides), 297

  Everything in its season, and turnips in Advent, 207

  Everything is good for something, 116

  Everything is good in its season, 90

  Everything is of every year, 116

  Everything may be borne except good fortune, 116

  Everything may be bought except day and night, 41

  Everything may be repaired except the neckbone, 129

  Everything must have a beginning, 6, 116, 292

  Everything new is beautiful, 92

  Everything passes, everything breaks, everything wearies, 59

  Everything would be well were there not a “but,” 133

  Every to-morrow brings its bread, 13

  Every truth is not to be told, 117

  Every tub must stand on its own bottom, 367

  Every vine must have its stake, 117

  Every why has its wherefore, 297

  Every wind does not shake down the nut, 117

  Every wind is against a leaky ship, 366

  Every woman would rather be handsome than good, 156

  Evil be to him who evil thinks, 82

  Evil is soon done, but slowly mended, 395

  Evil must be driven out by evil, 390

  Evil wastes itself, 395

  Evil words corrupt good manners, 302

  Exchange is no robbery, 170

  Expect not at another’s hand what you can do by your own, 197

  Experience is the best teacher, 145

  Extravagant offers are a kind of denial, 116

  Extremes meet, 34

  Eye-service is the courtier’s art, 394


  F.

  Faint heart is always in danger, 273

  Faint heart never won fair lady, 27, 136, 173, 348

  Faint praise is akin to abuse, 372

  Fair and softly goes far, 45, 283

  Fair flowers do not remain long by the wayside, 168

  Fair, good, rich, and wise, is a woman four stories high, 8

  Fair is he that comes, but fairer he that brings, 54

  Fair money can cover much that’s foul, 337

  Fair promises bind fools, 74

  Fair things are soon snatched away, 8

  Fair words and rotten apples, 74

  Fair words, but look to your purse, 74

  Fair words don’t butter the cabbage, 168

  Fair words don’t fill the pocket, 168

  Fair words please the fool, and sometimes the wise, 367

  Fair words won’t feed a cat, 74

  Fair words won’t fill the sack, 337, 398

  Fall sick, and you will see who is your friend and who not, 215

  Falsehood is the Devil’s daughter, and speaks her father’s tongue, 385

  Falsehood never tires of going round about, 385

  Falsehood travels and grows, 385

  Falseness often lurks beneath fair hair, 367

  Fame and repute follow a man to the door, 396

  Fancy requires much, necessity but little, 174

  Far fetched and dear bought is meat for ladies, 340

  Far from the eyes, far from the heart, 109

  Farewell baskets, the vintage is ended, 2

  Fast as the hare runs, the greyhound outruns her, since he catches
  her, 241

  Fat broth cannot be made of nothing, 42

  Fat head, lean brains, 77

  Fat hens lay few eggs, 148

  Fat pastures make fat venison, 8

  Father and mother are kind, but God is kinder, 367

  Favour and gifts disturb justice, 372

  Fear guards the vineyard, 107, 232

  Fear is a great inventor, 30

  Feather by feather the goose is plucked, 72

  Feet accustomed to go cannot be still, 291

  Feet that are used to move cannot remain quiet, 240

  Feign death and the bull will leave you, 278

  Few have luck, all have death, 367

  Few women turn grey because their husbands die, 367

  Fie upon a cloak in fair weather, 18

  “Fie upon thee, how black thou art!” said the kettle to the sauce
  pan, 369

  Fine and fine make but a slender doublet, 18

  Fine birds are commonly plucked, 19

  Fine feathers make fine birds, 28, 307

  Fine linen often conceals a foul skin, 402

  Fine words don’t fill the belly, 277, 336

  Fine words without deeds go not far, 367

  Fire and love do not say, “Go to your work,” 217

  Fire and straw soon make a flame, 380

  Fire and water are good servants but bad masters, 148, 380

  Fire drives the wasp out of its nest, 102

  Fire is not quenched with fire, 102

  Fire in the heart sends smoke into the head, 148

  First a turnip, then a sheep; next a cow, and then the gallows, 318

  First come, first served, 36

  First look at home, then censure me, 169

  First weigh, then venture, 145

  Fish and guests smell at three days old, 365

  Fish begin to stink at the head, 138

  Fit the foot to the shoe, not the shoe to the foot, 264

  Five fingers hold more than two forks, 148

  Flatterers are cats that lick before and scratch behind, 168

  Flattery is sweet food for those who can swallow it, 398

  Flies are easier caught with honey than with vinegar, 43

  Flies don’t light on a boiling pot, 3, 69

  Flies flock to the lean horse, 66

  Flowers are the pledges of fruit, 351

  Flying from the bull he fell into the river, 225

  Folks say there is a lack of four sorts of people on earth: of
  priests, else one would not have six or seven benefices; of
  gentlemen, else every boor would not want to be a squire; of whores,
  else married women and nuns would not carry on the trade; of Jews,
  else Christians would not practise usury (_Trench quotes this as the
  longest Proverb known_), 160

  Follow the customs, or fly the country, 389

  Follow the river and you will reach the sea, 57

  Follow the road and you will reach an inn, 271

  Folly hath eagle’s wings, but the eyes of an owl, 304

  Folly is the most incurable of maladies, 218

  Fond of lawsuits, little wealth; fond of doctors, little health; fond
  of friars, little honour, 198

  Fools and the perverse fill the lawyer’s purse, 233

  Fools are free all the world over, 312

  Fools ask what’s o’clock, but wise men know their time, 305

  Fools build houses, wise men buy them, 163

  Fools go in throngs, 3

  Fools grow without watering, 104

  Fools invent fashions and wise men follow them, 34

  Fools make feasts, and wise men eat them, 104

  Fools must not be set on eggs, 163

  Fools sometimes give wise men counsel, 279

  Foot firm till death, 268

  For a bad tongue, scissors, 265

  For a good companion good company, 193

  For a good dinner and a gentle wife you can afford to wait, 365

  For a stubborn ass a hard goad, 2

  For a stubborn ass a stubborn driver, 5

  For a voracious beast pebbles in his feed, 263

  For a web begun God sends thread, 6, 73

  For a wife and a horse go to your neighbour, 106

  For all one’s early rising, it dawns none the sooner, 241

  For an honest man half his wits are enough; the whole is too little
  for a knave, 68

  For better for worse they have married me, 205

  For evil tongues, scissors, 195

  For extreme ills extreme remedies, 69

  For great evils strong remedies, 341

  For lack of men (or good men) they made my father a justice, 241, 292

  For love of the ox the wolf licks the yoke (Catalan), 240

  For love the wolf eats the sheep, 174

  For one pleasure a thousand pains, 46

  For overbuying there’s no help but selling again, 6

  For poor people small coin, 264

  For sake of the knight the lady kisses the squire, 46

  For the buyer a hundred eyes are too few, for the seller one is
  enough, 66

  For the flying enemy a golden bridge, 70

  For the last comer, the bones, 6

  For the upright there are no laws, 148

  For want of a nail the shoe is lost, 242

  For whom does the blind man’s wife adorn herself? 227

  For whom sword and courage are not enough, corslet and lance will not
  be enough, 201

  Forbear a quarrel with a friend to move: anger breeds hatred, concord
  sweetens love, 334

  Forbearance is no acquittance, 134

  Forbidden fruit is sweet (or the sweetest), 101, 172

  Forced love does not last, 318

  Fore-talk spares after-talk, 174

  Forewarned, forearmed, 49

  Forgive and forget, 172

  Forgive thyself nothing and others much, 173

  Forgiven is not forgotten, 172

  Fortune aids the bold, 197

  Fortune and glass soon break, alas! 319

  Fortune, and go to sleep, 99

  Fortune and misfortune are two buckets in a well, 150

  Fortune and women are partial to fools, 150

  Fortune can take from us only what she has given us, 29

  Fortune comes to him who seeks her, 132

  Fortune does not stand waiting at any one’s door, 322

  Fortune gives many too much, but no one enough, 137

  Fortune helps fools, 106

  Fortune is a woman; if you neglect her to-day, expect not to regain
  her to-morrow, 29

  Fortune is like women: loves youth and is fickle, 137

  Fortune is round; it makes one a king, another a dunghill, 322

  Fortune lost, nothing lost; courage lost, much lost; honour lost,
  more lost; soul lost, all lost, 320

  Fortune often knocks at the door, but the fool does not invite her
  in, 385

  Foster a raven and it will peck out your eyes, 210

  Foul linen should be washed at home, 22

  Four eyes see more than two, 131, 173, 232, 282

  Four things put a man beside himself—women, tobacco, cards, and wine,
  245

  Foxes come at last to the furrier’s, 17

  Fox’s broth, cold and scalding, 207

  Free man, free goods (_So_: Free ships, free goods—_American_), 148

  Fresh pork and new wine kill a man before his time, 242

  Friar Modest never was prior (A modest friar never was prior), 99

  Friends and mules fail us at hard passes (Galician), 199, 265

  Friends are known in adversity, 287

  Friends are known in time of need (Friends in need are friends
  indeed), 65, 329

  Friendship broken may be soldered, but never made whole, 199

  Friendship should be unpicked, not rent, 106

  Friendships are cheap when they can be bought by doffing the hat, 108

  From a bad paymaster take straw (_i.e._ any trifle), 90

  From a closed door the devil turns away, 275

  From a praying young man, and a fasting old one, God preserve my
  cloak, 212

  From a silent man, and a dog that does not bark, deliver us, 211

  From a silent person remove your dwelling, 212

  From a spark the house is burnt, 340

  From bishop to turn miller, 56

  From children expect childish acts, 362

  From confessors, doctors, and lawyers, do not conceal the truth of
  your case, 2

  From great rivers come great fish, 274

  From little things men go on to great, 340

  From long journeys, long lies, 212

  From my gossip’s bread a large piece for my godson, 212

  From saying to doing is a long way, 90

  From short pleasure long repentance, 14

  From small beginnings come great things, 340

  From smooth (or still) water God preserve me, from rough (or running)
  I will preserve myself, 90, 211

  From snow, whether baked or boiled, you will get nothing but water,
  90, 211

  From that dust comes this mud, 210

  From the boat we get to the ship, 340

  From the father comes honour, from the mother comfort, 340

  From the same flower the bee extracts honey and the wasp gall, 90

  From the soldier who has no cloak, keep your own in your chest, 276

  From those I trust God guard me, from those I mistrust I will guard
  myself, 90

  From to-morrow till to-morrow time goes a long journey, 14

  From trivial things great contests oft arise, 340

  Froth is not beer, 337

  Full bottles and glasses make swearers and asses, 341

  Full vessels give the least sound, 174

  Funeral sermon, lying sermon, 158


  G.

  Gain has a pleasant odour, come whence it will, 269

  Geese are plucked as long as they have any feathers, 333

  Gentleness does more than violence, 45

  Get a good name, and go to sleep, 67, 208, 272

  Get out of that place and let me take it, 43

  Gifts are according to the giver, 140

  Gifts are often losses, 127

  Gifts break (or dissolve) rocks, 210, 273

  Gifts make friendship lasting, 390

  Give a clown your finger, and he’ll grasp your fist, 70, 299

  Give a clown your foot, and he’ll take your hand, 198

  Give a grateful man more than he asks, 266

  Give a hint to the man of sense, and consider the thing done (A word
  to the wise is enough), 264

  Give a rogue an inch, and he will take an ell, 371

  Give a traitor good words and you make him loyal, 213

  Give an ass oats and he runs after thistles, 318

  Give at first asking what you safely can; ’tis certain gain to help
  an honest man, 322

  Give him a foot and he’ll take four, 57

  Give him an inch and he’ll take an ell, 318

  Give him your finger and he will seize your hand, 70, 299

  Give me a seat, and I will make myself room to lie down, 210

  Give me the rhubarb and you may take the senna, 45

  Give me money, not advice, 273

  Give me the ass that carries me in preference to the horse that
  throws me, 240

  Give orders, and do it yourself, and you will be rid of anxiety, 282

  Give orders, and do no more, and nothing will be done, 230, 282

  Give out that you have many friends, and believe that you have but
  few, 22

  Give the priest drink, for the clerk is thirsty, 90

  Give the wise man a hint and leave him to act, 66

  Give time time, 90

  Give to a pig when it grunts, and to a child when it cries, and you
  will have a fine pig, and a bad child, 371

  Give to him that has, 90

  Give unto the king what is the king’s, and unto God what is God’s, 149

  Give your wife the short knife, and keep the long one yourself, 384

  Giving alms never lessens the purse, 217

  Giving is fishing, 93

  Glowworms are not lanterns, 108

  Gluttony kills more than the sword, 29, 111

  Go in God’s name, for he takes a loaf of mine, 261

  Go not every evening to your brother’s house, 194

  Go not with every ailment to the doctor, with every plaint to the
  lawyer, or with every thirst to the can, 230, 286

  Go not with every hunger to the cupboard, nor with every thirst to
  the pitcher, 286

  Go softly and look afar, 344

  Go softly over bad bits of road, 67

  Go to bed late, rise early, you will see your own harm and that of
  others, 274

  Go to bed without supper, and you will rise without debt, 194, 274

  Go to the sea if you would fish well, 131

  Go to your aunt’s house, but not every day, 194

  Go to your rich friend’s house when invited; to your poor friend’s
  without invitation, 264

  God alone understands fools, 15

  God comes at last, when we think he is farthest off, 372

  God cures, and the doctor takes the fee (or gets the money; or God
  healeth, and the physician hath the thanks), 92, 150, 214, 275, 323

  God deliver me from a man of one book, 214, 319

  God deliver us from a gentleman by day and a friar by night, 214

  God does not pay weekly, but pays at the end, 319

  God does not smite with both hands, 236

  God give you luck, my son, for little wit must serve your turn, 261,
  295

  God gives a curst cow short horns, 65

  God gives almonds to some who have no teeth, 210

  God gives birds their food, but they must fly for it, 319

  God gives clothes according to the cold, 273 (See God sends cold)

  God gives every bird its food, but does not throw it into the nest,
  372

  God gives little folks small gifts, 372

  God gives the will, necessity gives the law, 372

  God gives wings to the ant that she may perish the sooner, 210

  God grant, dear wife, that this son be ours, 253

  God grant me to argue (or dispute) with those who understand me, 214,
  275

  God grant you fortune, my son, for knowledge avails you little, 214

  God has given nuts to some who have no teeth, 273

  God heals and the doctor has the thanks, 92 (_See_ God cures)

  God help the sheep when the wolf is judge, 371

  God helps the early riser, 201

  God helps the strongest, 150, 319

  God helps him who helps himself (or them that help themselves), 53,
  85, 152, 191, 252, 274

  God helps three sorts of people: fools, children, and drunkards, 15

  God is everywhere, except where he has his delegate (_ironical_), 150

  God keep me from my friends, from my enemies I will keep myself, 99

  God keep you from “It is too late,” 223

  God knows who is a good pilgrim, 15

  God made us, and we admire ourselves, 224

  God never sends mouths but he sends meat, 371

  God permits, but not for ever, 274

  God puts a good root in the little pig’s way, 6

  God save me from one who does not drink, 92

  God save me from the man of one book, 92

  God save me from the man of one occupation, 92

  God save me from those I trust in (or in whom I confide), 15

  God save you from a bad neighbour, and from a beginner on the fiddle,
  92

  God save you from a man who has but one business, 16

  God saves the moon from the wolves, 15

  God sells knowledge for labour, honour for risk, 320

  God sends cold according to the clothes, 15, 92, 372

  God sends meat and the devil sends cooks, 92

  God sends nothing but what can be borne, 92

  God sent him meat, but the devil cooked it, 320

  God take you, pound (of flax), drunk out and not yet spun, 194

  God tempers the wind to the shorn lamb, 1

  God will provide, but a good bundle of straw will not be amiss, 214

  God’s friend, the priest’s foe, 150

  God’s mill goes slowly, but it grinds well, 150

  God’s work is soon done, 17

  Gold does not buy everything, 109

  Gold is gold, though it be in a rogue’s purse, 372

  Gold is proved in the fire, friendship in need, 380

  Gold lies deep in the mountain, dirt on the highway, 150

  Golden bishop, wooden crosier; wooden bishop, golden crosier, 17

  Gone is gone; no Jew will lend upon it, 152

  Good and bad make up a city, 270

  Good bargains are ruinous, 34

  Good bargains empty the purse, 108, 151

  Good blood will never lie, 9

  Good comes to better, and better to bad, 8

  Good company makes short miles, 320

  Good corn is not reaped from a bad field, 397

  Good counsel comes overnight, 151

  Good counsel is no better than bad counsel, if it be not taken in
  time, 395

  Good counsel never comes too late, 151

  Good counsel will not rot, if it be got in dry, 371

  Good day to you all! said the fox, when he got into the goose-pen, 320

  Good drink drives out bad thoughts, 320

  Good faith is a seldom guest, when you have him, hold him fast, 171

  Good faith stole the cow, 170

  Good fruit never comes from a bad tree, 287

  Good, good, good, but God keep my ass out of his rye, 206

  Good hunters track narrowly, 320

  Good is good, but better beats it, 101

  Good is the delay which makes sure, 269

  Good is the fowl which another rears, 205

  Good land should not be quitted for a bad landlord, 42

  Good leading makes good following, 343

  Good luck makes its way by elbowing, 201

  Good management is better than good income, 281

  Good manners and plenty of money will make my son a gentleman, 270

  Good morrow spectacles, farewell lasses, 8

  Good never comes too often, 371

  Good news is rumoured, bad news flies, 216, 287

  Good or bad we must all live, 115

  Good people live far asunder, 148

  Good repute is better than a golden belt, 9

  Good repute is like the cypress: once cut, it never puts forth leaf
  again, 105

  Good right needs good help, 320

  Good swimmers are drowned at last, 9, 100

  Good table, bad will, 269

  Good things require time, 320

  Good thongs may be cut out of other people’s hides, 134

  Good tree, good fruit, 320

  Good ware was never dear, 105

  Good watching drives away ill-luck, 8

  Good wine is milk for the aged, 151

  Good wine makes good blood, 76

  Good wine makes the horse go, 4

  Good wine needs no crier, 65, 151, 221, 261, 287, 320

  Good wine needs no sign, 1

  Good wine praises itself, 320

  Good wine ruins the purse, and bad the stomach, 151

  Good wine sells itself, 151, 216

  Good words and bad deeds deceive both wise and simple, 206, 269

  Got with the fife, spent with the drum, 161

  Govern a horse with a bit, and a shrew with a stick, 399

  Grain by grain the hen fills her crop, 223, 278

  Grass grows not upon the highway, 336

  Grease a churl’s boots and he’ll say you are burning them, 19

  Grease the wheels, 130

  Great boast, little roast, 321

  Great boaster, little doer, 19

  Great cry and little wool, 340

  Great cry and little wool, as the man said who shaved the sow, 73

  Great cry and little wool, said the fool, when he sheared his hogs,
  173, 340

  Great disputing repels truth, 19

  Great fish are caught in great waters, 150

  Great fishes break the net, 321

  Great fools must have great bells, 320

  Great griefs are mute, 101

  Great lords have long hands, but they do not reach to heaven, 399

  Great lords will have much, and poor folk can give but little, 399

  Great men may jest with saints, 150

  Great men’s requests are commands, 151, 374

  Great men’s servants don’t think little of themselves, 151

  Great promisers, bad paymasters, 151, 320

  Great scholars are not the shrewdest men, 34

  Great smoke, little roast, 100

  Great talkers are commonly liars, 151

  Great talkers are not great doers, 34, 321

  Great thieves always have their sleeves full of gags, 34

  Great thieves hang little ones, 34, 150

  Great trees give more shade than fruit, 150

  Great wealth, great care, 321

  Great wits meet, 33

  Greater fools than they of Zago, who dunged the steeple to make it
  grow, 120

  Greatness alone is not enough, or the cow would outrun the hare, 150

  Green Christmas, a white Easter, 151

  Grey hairs are death’s blossoms, 371

  Grief for a dead wife lasts to the door, 93, 276

  Guessing is missing, 319


  H.

  “Had I known” is a poor man, 151

  Had it not been for an if, the old woman would have bitten a wolf, 374

  Hair by hair, and the head gets bald, 364

  Half a brain is enough for him who says little, 66

  Half a house is half a hell, 151

  Half a word to the wise is enough, 314

  Half figs, half raisins, 39

  Handsome apples are sometimes sour, 168, 337

  Handsome is not what is handsome, but what pleases, 112

  Handsome is that handsome does, 168

  Handsome women generally fall to the lot of ugly men, 69

  Handsomely asked, handsomely refused, 1

  Hang the young thief, and the old one will not steal, 373

  Hannibal is at the gate, 321

  Happy he who can take warning from the mishaps of others, 397

  Happy is she who is in love with an old dotard, 74

  Happy is the man who has a handsome wife close to an abbey, 37

  Happy the child whose father goes to the devil, 20

  Happy the house in which there is no shaven crown, 205

  Hard against hard never was good, 151

  Hard is a new law imposed on old licence, 95

  Hard upon hard never made a good wall, 95, 276

  Hares are caught with hounds, fools with praise, and women with gold,
  162

  Hares are not caught with drums, 42, 333

  Harm watch harm catch, 49, 78

  Haste makes waste, 321

  Hasten at leisure, 20, 142

  Hastiness is the beginning of wrath, and its end repentance, 321

  Hasty questions require slow answers, 336

  Hasty speed don’t oft succeed, 321

  Hat in hand goes through the land, 153

  Hatred renewed is worse than at first, 116

  Have a bill to pay at Easter, and your Lent will be short, 213

  Have luck and sleep, 126 (_See_ Fortune and go to sleep)

  Having is having, come whence it may, 151

  He asks advice in vain who will not follow it, 46

  He avoided the fly and swallowed the spider, 278

  He beat the bushes and another caught the birds, 20

  He begins to grow bad who believes himself good, 88

  He burns the candle at both ends, 325

  He buys honey dear who has to lick it off thorns, 327

  He buys very dear who begs, 268

  He buys well who is not called a donkey, 205

  He came time enough who was hung by candlelight, 373

  He can do but little who cannot threaten another, 203

  He cannot find water in the sea, 235

  He cannot lead a good life who serves without wages, 75

  He cannot lay eggs, but he can cackle, 327

  He carries fire and water, 26

  He counts his chickens before they are hatched, 327

  He cries out before he is hurt, 96

  He dances well to whom fortune pipes, 73, 177

  He did not invent gunpowder, 236

  He does a good day’s work who rids himself of a fool, 9

  He does not a little who burns his house: he frightens the rats and
  warms himself, 235

  He does not guard himself well who is not always on his guard, 24

  He does not live in this world that can skin a grindstone, 354

  He doubts nothing who knows nothing, 284

  He drives a good waggonful into his farm who gets a good wife, 372

  He earns a farthing and has a penn’orth of thirst, 327

  He expects that larks will fall ready roasted into his mouth, 20

  He expects to find water at the first stroke of the spade, 195

  He falls into the pit who leads another into it, 207

  He falls on his back and breaks his nose, 26

  He fears the sack who has been in it, 355

  He fishes on who catches one, 59

  He forgot nothing except to say farewell, 23

  He flays enough who holds the foot, 5

  He gains enough who loses sorrow, 5

  He gains much who loses a vain hope, 73

  He gapes like a clown at a fair, 326

  He gathers up ashes and scatters flour, 197

  He gives twice who gives in a trice, 53, 79, 179, 247

  He goes about it like a cat round hot milk, 145

  He goes as willingly as a thief to the gallows, 145

  He goes safely to trial whose father is a judge, 251

  He goes safely who has nothing, 57

  He got out of the mud and fell into the river, 131

  He had need rise betimes who who would please everybody, 54, 355

  He hangs the May-branch at every door. (Alluding to the Italian
  custom of young men hanging out May-branches overnight before the
  door of their mistress), 73

  He has a good pledge of the cat who has her skin, 9

  He has a head, and so has a pin, 276

  He has a ton of knowledge, but the bottom is out, 326

  He has a wolf-conscience, 326

  He has beans in his ears. (Who so deaf as he that will not hear?) 145

  He has command of the sack who is seated on it, 373

  He has done like the Perugian who, when his head was broken, ran home
  for his helmet, 95

  He has eaten his corn in the blade, 20

  He has enough to do who holds the handle of the frying-pan, 8

  He has enough who is content, 5

  He has given the hen for the egg, 145

  He has great need of a fool who makes himself one, 19

  He has him under his thumb, 326

  He has lost the nest-egg, 326

  He has much to do who would please everybody, 233

  He has not done who who is beginning, 40

  He has nothing, for whom nothing is enough, 55, 286

  He has put all his eggs into one basket, 20

  He has seen the wolf, 326

  He has the Bible on his lips, but not in his heart, 326

  He hauls at a long rope who expects another’s death, 70

  He howls with the wolves, and bleats with the sheep, 326

  He is a bad shot who cannot find an excuse, 143

  He is a bad smith who cannot bear smoke, 143

  He is a bad workman who cannot talk of work, 146

  He is a fool that praises himself, and a madman that speaks ill of
  himself, 353

  He is a fool who boasts of four things: that he has good wine, a good
  horse, a handsome wife, and plenty of money, 118

  He is a fool who does not know from what quarter the wind blows, 118

  He is a fool who loses the flight for the leap, 118

  He is a fool who makes his physician his heir, 11

  He is a fool who makes a mallet of his fist, 11

  He is a fool who thinks that another does not think, 125, 233, 286

  He is a great fool who forgets himself, 21

  He is a great simpleton who starves himself to feed another, 224

  He is a horse with four white feet (_i. e._ he is unlucky), 12

  He is a man like a book, 303

  He is a man who acts like a man, 353

  He is a poor smith who is afraid of sparks, 359

  He is a sorry barber who has but one comb, 128

  He is a thief indeed who robs a thief, 8

  He is a very bad manager of honey who leaves nothing to lick off his
  fingers, 9

  He is an essence of scoundrels, 326

  He is an aristocrat in folio, 323

  He is an old saint, and may leave it in the hands of God, 274

  He is as easily caught as a hare with drums, 326 (_See_ Hares are not
  caught, &c.)

  He is as good a Catholic as Duke Alva’s dog, who ate flesh in Lent,
  327

  He is as good a divine as Judas was an apostle, 323

  He is as poor as Job, 326

  He is as sharp as a leaden dagger, 326

  He is as welcome as the first day in Lent (alluding to fast-day), 327

  He is blind enough who cannot see through a sieve, 224

  He is called clever who cheats and plunders his friend, 21

  He is easy to lure, who is ready to follow, 353

  He is nowhere who is everywhere, 112

  He is in safety who rings the tocsin, 202, 222

  He is in search of a ram with five feet, 77

  He is like a cat, he always falls on his feet, 21

  He is like a singed cat, better than he looks, 26

  He is like Jean de Nivelle’s dog, that runs away when he is called, 11

  He is like the anchor that is always in the sea, yet does not learn
  to swim, 95

  He is like the gardener’s dog, who don’t eat cabbages and will let no
  one else eat them, 21

  He is lucky who forgets what cannot be mended, 150

  He is master of another man’s life who is indifferent to his own, 97

  He is most likely to spill who holds the vessel in his hand, 354

  He is most cheated who cheats himself, 356

  He is my friend who grinds at my mill, 222, 277

  He is nearest to God who has the fewest wants, 353

  He is nearest a thing who has it in his hands, 353

  He is no friend that eats his own by himself, and mine with me, 285

  He is no merchant who always gains, 323

  He is no small knave who knows a great one, 361

  He is noble who performs noble deeds, 326

  He is not a bad driver who knows how to turn, 373

  He is not a good mason who refuses any stone, 112

  He is not a man who cannot say no, 112

  He is not a thorough wise man who cannot play the fool on occasion, 90

  He is not fit to be a baker whose head is made of butter, 353

  He is not free who drags his chain after him, 24, 112

  He is not happy who knows it not, 98

  He is not so much of a devil as he is black, 24

  He is not yet born who can please everybody, 355

  He is of the race of Johnny Van Cleeve, who would always much rather
  have than give, 326

  He is out of danger who rings the alarm-bell, 202, 222

  He is past preaching to who does not care to do well, 21

  He is rich enough who is contented, 166

  He is rich enough who owes nothing, 17, 97

  He is rich enough who does not want, 73

  He is so wise, that he goes upon the ice three days before it
  freezes, 327

  He is the devil’s valet, he does more than he is ordered, 11

  He is the wisest man who does not think himself so, 33

  He is the world’s master who despises it, its slave who prizes it, 97

  He is too idle to fetch his breath, 326

  He is too stupid to be trusted alone by the fire, 326

  He is very blind who cannot see the sun, 75

  He is wise who learns at another’s cost, 125

  He is worthy of sweets who has tasted bitters, 353

  He is young enough who has health, and he rich enough who has no
  debts, 353

  He is your friend who gets you out of a scrape, 201, 267

  He keeps his word, as the sun keeps butter, 325

  He knocks boldly at the door who brings good news, 19, 72, 373

  He knows best where the shoe pinches who wears it, 356, 373

  He knows enough who knows how to live and keep his own counsel, 5

  He knows it as well as his Pater-noster, 255

  He knows the water best who has waded through it, 374

  He knows well where the thorn pricks him, 95

  He knows where the devil carries his tail, 96, 124

  He laughs at scars who never felt a wound, 139

  He laughs well (or best) who laughs longest, 55, 124 (_See_ He who
  laughs)

  He lays his eggs beside his nest, 327

  He lies like a tooth-drawer, 23

  He lives in the land of promise, 327

  He looks for his ass and sits on its back, 20

  He lords it (or swaggers) like an eel in a tub, 325

  He loses his market who has nothing to sell, 201

  He loses least in a quarrel who keeps his tongue in check, 356

  He loves well who never forgets, 75, 205, 268

  He may lie boldly who comes from afar, 1, 95

  He may swim boldly who is held up by the chin, 9

  He means well, but has a bad way of showing it, 326

  He measures others by his own standard, 95, 325

  He must be a clever host that would take the devil into his hostelry,
  355

  He must be ill-favoured who scares the devil, 355

  He must be pure who would blame another, 373

  He must cry loud who would scare the devil, 373

  He must gape wide who would gape against an oven, 327

  He must have clean fingers who would blow another’s nose, 355

  He must have crept out of hell while the devil was asleep, 326

  He must have iron fingers who would flay the devil, 373

  He must have keen eyes that would know a maid at sight, 145

  He must have plenty of butter who would stop everybody’s mouth, 373

  He must indeed be a good master who never errs, 325

  He must keep a sharp look-out who would speak the truth, 373

  He must rise betimes who would please everybody, 327

  He must shoot well who always hits the mark, 323

  He must stand high that would see the end of his own destiny, 355

  He must stoop that has a low door, 94

  He need have plenty of meal who would stop every man’s mouth
  (_Scotch_: He behoves to have meal enou that sal stop ilka man’s
  mou’), 98, 322, 355

  He needs say nothing about the score who pays nothing, 20

  He needs a long spoon that would eat out of the same dish with the
  devil, 355

  He never was a friend who ceased to be so for a slight cause, 287

  He never was a friend who has ceased to be one, 48

  He ought not to complain of the sea who returns to it a second time,
  73

  He pays for the glasses who breaks them, 48

  He plays best who wins, 49,182

  He preaches well who lives well, 78, 205

  He pulls at a long rope who desires another’s death, 3

  He puts his sickle into another man’s harvest, 23

  He ruins himself in promises, and clears himself by giving nothing, 26

  He runs as fast as if he had eggs in his shoes, 327

  He runs far who never turns, 89

  He runs heavily who is forced to run, 354

  He’s a friend at sneezing-time,—the most that can be got from him is
  a “God bless you,” 71

  He said devil, but meant you, 327

  He scolds most that can hurt the least, 374

  He sells the bird on the branch, 96

  He sets the wolf to guard the sheep, 95

  He should not complain of being cheated who buys cloth by the sample,
  287

  He sins as much who holds the bag as he who puts into it, 7

  He sits well who can rise without help, 355

  He sleeps securely who has nothing to lose, 17

  He slumbers enough who does nothing, 5

  He sticks his nose in everything (He has his finger in every pie), 145

  He struts as valiantly as an English cock, 327

  He studies the Bible of fifty-two leaves (a pack of cards), 326

  He sups ill who eats up all at dinner, 37

  He swims on his own bulrush, 328

  He takes out a nail and puts in a pin, 77

  He that abideth low cannot fall hard, 310

  He that at twenty is not, at thirty knows not, and at forty has not,
  will never be, nor ever know, nor ever have, 79

  He that bears the cross, blesses himself first, 354

  He that buildeth upon the highway hath many advisers, 179, 308 (_See_
  He who builds)

  He that buys the office of magistrate must of necessity sell justice,
  79

  He that can be patient finds his foe at his feet, 309

  He that chases another does not sit still himself, 308

  He that climbs high falls heavily, 182

  He that comes unbidden goes unthanked, 310

  He that corrects not youth controls not age, 50

  He that courts injury will obtain it, 373

  He that creepeth falleth not, 310

  He that cuts above himself will get splinters in his eye, 376

  He that despises the little is not worthy of the great, 310

  He that does ill never wants for excuses, 266

  He that does not lie, does not come of good blood, 251

  He that does not save pennies will never have pounds, 352

  He that eats his fowl alone may saddle his horse alone, 252, 292

  He that examines every bush will hardly get into the wood, 185

  He that exceeds his commission must answer for it at his own cost, 80

  He that finds fault wants to buy, 186, 248 (_See_ He who)

  He that finds something before it is lost, will die before he is
  sick, 309

  He that has a choice has trouble, 309

  He that has an hour’s start will not be hanged, 253

  He that has but one pig easily fattens it, 82

  He that has good legs has often bad boots, 182

  He that has lost his credit is dead to the world, 180

  He that has no head needs no hat, 183

  He that has no ill luck grows weary of good luck, 250

  He that has no money in his purse should have fair words on his lips,
  376

  He that has not money in his purse should have honey in his mouth, 50

  He that has swallowed the devil may swallow his horns, 82

  He that has the devil on his neck must find him work, 308

  He that has the luck leads the bride to church, 309

  He that hath a head of wax must not approach the fire, 48

  He that hath a wife is sure of strife, 49

  He that hath an ill name is half hanged, 309

  He that hears much, hears many lies, 311

  He that hides can find, 48

  He that hides is no better than he that steals, 373

  He that holds is no better than he that scourges, 373

  He that holds the handle of the frying-pan runs the risk of burning
  himself, 10

  He that hunts others must run himself, 179

  He that hunts two hares at once will catch neither, 49, 343

  He that inquires much, learns much, 378

  He that is afraid of the devil does not grow rich, 82

  He that is ashamed to eat is ashamed to live, 48

  He that is at sea has not the wind in his hands, 310 (_See_ He who is
  at sea)

  He that is bitten by a dog must apply some of its hair, 311

  He that is born to be hanged will never be drowned, 80, 182, 309

  He that is drowning shouts though he be not heard, 78

  He that is embarked with the devil must sail with him, 80, 310

  He that is good for something is the ass of the public, 101

  He that is in fault is in suspicion, 80

  He that is more civil than usual, either wants to cozen you or has
  need of you, 253

  He that is not gallant at twenty, strong at thirty, rich at forty, or
  experienced at fifty, will never be gallant, strong, rich or prudent,
  246

  He that is out at sea, must either sail or sink, 377

  He that is thrown would still wrestle, 28

  He that is too much in haste, may stumble on a good road, 53

  He that is unkind to his own will not be kind to others (Galician) 245

  He that jokes, confesses, 78

  He that keeps out of harm’s way will gather goodly riches, 355

  He that laughs on Friday may cry on Sunday, 58

  He that lies down with dogs will get up with fleas, 52, 79, 247, 376

  He that lives with cripples learns to limp, 308

  He that loves his child chastises him, 311

  He that makes himself dirt is trod on by the swine, 86

  He that makes one basket can make a hundred, 249

  He that marries for love has good nights, but sorry days, 179

  He that minds his business at home, will not be accused of taking
  part in the fray, 248

  He that never fails never grows rich, 83

  He that paints a flower does not give it perfume, 85

  He that pelts every barking dog must pick up a great many stones, 183

  He that performs his own errand saves the messenger’s hire, 392

  He that picks up all sorts of wood soon gets an armful, 179

  He that plays at racket must watch the ball, 309

  He that reckons without his host must reckon again, 49, 80, 111

  He that says A, must also say B, 179

  He that says what he should not, will hear what he would not, 374

  He that seeks, finds, and sometimes what he would rather not, 78

  He that seeks to have many friends never has any, 87

  He that shows his money shows his judgment, 82

  He that sings himself is the best pleased, 354

  He that sits among reeds cuts pipes when he pleases, 182

  He that spares something to-day will have something to-morrow, 309

  He that spends more than he is worth spins a rope for his own neck, 51

  He that stands may fall, 80

  He that stays in the valley will not get over the hill, 52

  He that stirs honey will have some of it stick to him, 249

  He that stumbles and falls not, mends his pace, 53, 248

  He that ties well, unties well (Safe bind, safe find), 246

  He that tickles himself, may laugh when he will, 185, 309, 379

  He that trusts a faithless friend, has a good witness against him, 252

  He that ventures not, fails not, 51

  He that wants should not be bashful, 78

  He that wants the kernel must crack the nut, 22, 180, 308

  He that wants to beat a dog can easily find a stick, 87 (_See_ Who
  wants)

  He that wants to hang a dog, is sure to find a rope, 378

  He that wants to hang a dog, says that it bites the sheep, 352

  He that well considers the world, must own he has never seen a
  better, 308

  He that will does more than he that can, 281

  He that will have eggs, must bear with cackling, 309

  He that will have fire must bear with smoke, 311

  He that will not be saved needs no preacher, 184

  He that will not when he can, cannot when he will, 83, 251 (_See_ Who
  will not)

  He that will not when he may, when he will shall have nay, 50

  He that will not strive in this world should not have come into it, 84

  He that won’t listen, must feel, 184

  He that would be healthy, must eat temperately, and sup early, 252

  He that would be healthy must wear his winter clothes in summer, 252

  He that would be ill served should keep plenty of servants, 87

  He that would be old long must begin betimes, 292

  He that would cheat a Jew, must be a Jew, 188

  He that would have a beautiful wife should choose her on a Saturday,
  252

  He that would have a thing done quickly and well must do it himself,
  87

  He that would heal a wound must not handle it, 88

  He that would jest must take a jest, else to let it alone were best,
  309

  He that would keep his eye sound must tie up his hand, 292

  He that would keep his house clean must not let priest or pigeon
  enter it, 54

  He that would stop everybody’s mouth needs plenty of flour, 183

  He that you seat upon your shoulder will often try to get upon your
  head, 400

  He thinks to catch shell-fish in the trees, 327

  He threatens many who affronts one, 265

  He to whom God gives no sons, the devil gives nephews, 251

  He waits long that waits for another man’s death, 327

  He wants to fly before he has wings, 327

  He was born on a Sunday, he likes work ready done, 21

  He was born upon St. Galtpert’s night, three days before luck, 326

  He was bom with a caul, 21

  He wastes his tears who weeps before the judge, 119

  He wears the mourning of his washerwoman, 26

  He who abuses others must not be particular about the answer he gets,
  355

  He who always tells me a lie never cheats me, 252

  He who always thinks it is too soon, is sure to come too late, 177

  He who asks the fewest favours is the best received, 250

  He who at thirty has no brains, will never purchase an estate, 246

  He who at twenty understands nothing, at thirty knows nothing, and at
  forty has nothing, will lead a wretched old age, 246

  He who avoids the temptation avoids the sin, 252

  He who begins and does not finish loses his labour, 49

  He who begins badly, ends badly, 250

  He who begins ill finishes worse, 82

  He who begins many things finishes few, 82

  He who begins much finishes little, 186

  He who bestirs himself sucks up, he who lies still dries up, 54

  He who blows in the fire will get sparks in his eyes, 182

  He who blows upon dust fills his eyes with it, 86

  He who brings bad tidings comes soon enough, 185

  He who brings is welcome, 179

  He who builds a house in the market-place, builds either too high or
  too low, 81

  He who builds a house, or marries, is left with a lank purse, 201

  He who builds according to every man’s advice will have a crooked
  house, 379

  He who builds by the roadside has many masters (or surveyors), 179,
  308

  He who builds on another’s ground loses his stone and mortar, 80

  He who builds on the public way must let the people have their say,
  179

  He who burns his posteriors must sit on blisters, 311

  He who buys a horse buys care, 247

  He who buys a house gets many a plank and nail for nothing, 181

  He who buys and sells does not feel what he spends, 247

  He who buys betimes buys cheaply, 79

  He who buys by the pennyworth keeps his own house and other men’s
  too, 87

  He who buys the broom can also buy the handle, 79

  He who buys what he don’t want, will soon sell what he does want, 79,
  183

  He who can give has many a good neighbour, 49

  He who can lick can bite, 51

  He who can sit upon a stone and feed himself should not move, 377

  He who can wait obtains what he wishes, 78

  He who cannot help may hinder, 184

  He who cannot paint must grind the colours, 184

  He who cannot pay with his purse must pay with his hide, 184

  He who cannot revenge himself is weak, he who will not is
  contemptible, 84

  He who cannot speak well of his trade does not understand it, 51

  He who can’t get bacon must be content with cabbage, 376

  He who carries nothing loses nothing, 52

  He who carries one burden will soon carry a hundred, 52

  He who catches one fish is a fisherman, 251

  He who chastises one threatens a hundred, 86

  He who cheats a cheat and robs a thief, earns a dispensation for 100
  years, 181

  He who chooses takes the worst (Pick and choose and take the worst),
  49

  He who climbs too high is near a fall, 65

  He who comes first grinds first, 251

  He who comes first to the mill is first served, 378

  He who conceits himself wise, has an ass near at hand, 183

  He who dances well goes from wedding to wedding, 246

  He who decries (or finds fault, or disparages) wants to buy, 49, 78,
  186, 248

  He who delays, gathers, 220

  He who demands does not command, 79

  He who denies all confesses all, 86, 253

  He who despises small things seldom grows rich, 398

  He who dies not in his twenty-third year, drowns not in his
  twenty-fourth, and is not slain in his twenty-fifth, may boast of
  good days, 343

  He who digs a pit for others falls into it himself, 179

  He who divides gets the worst share, 248

  He who does as he likes has no headache, 80

  He who does good to you either dies or goes away, 247

  He who does no more than another is no better than another, 251

  He who does not bait his hook catches nothing (or fishes in vain),
  50, 184

  He who does not gain, loses, 50

  He who does not go (or look) forward, stays behind, 184, 245

  He who does not honour his wife, dishonours himself, 246

  He who does not improve to-day will grow worse to-morrow, 185

  He who does not look before him, must take misfortune for his
  earnings, 375

  He who does not mix with the crowd knows nothing, 251

  He who does not open his eyes must open his purse, 180

  He who does not pick up a pin cares nothing for his wife, 250

  He who does not repair his gutter has a whole house to repair, 250

  He who does not show himself, is overlooked, 251

  He who does not speak, God does not hear, 251

  He who does not tire, achieves, 196

  He who does not tire, tires adversity, 51

  He who does not (or will not) when he can, cannot when he will, 50,
  83, 251

  He who does not whip the child does not mend the youth, 250

  He who does nothing, does ill, 50

  He who does the wrong forgets it, but not he who receives it, 82

  He who does what he likes, does not what he ought, 249

  He who doth his own business defileth not his fingers, 81

  He who doubts nothing knows nothing, 220

  He who dresses in others’ clothes will be undressed on the highway,
  248

  He who eats of the king’s goose will void a feather forty years
  after, 50

  He who eats pears with his master should not choose the best, 82

  He who eats the king’s cow lean, pays for it fat, 50, 249

  He who eats the meat let him pick the bone, 247

  He who eats and puts by, has sufficient for two meals, 247

  He who envies, suffers, 184

  He who esteems none but himself is as happy as a king, 84

  He who excuses himself accuses himself, 53, 86, 310

  He who fain would marry, in choice should not tarry, 182

  He who fears to suffer, suffers from fear, 49

  He who feeds a wolf, strengthens his enemy, 376

  He who feeds the hen ought to have the egg, 355

  He who finds fault wants to buy, 186, 248 (_See_ He who decries, &c.)

  He who finds what has not been lost, will chance to die before he is
  ill, 181

  He who flees, proves himself guilty, 376

  He who follows the crowd has many companions, 180

  He who forces love where none is found, remains a fool the whole year
  round, 183

  He who gets out of debt enriches himself, 52

  He who gives to the public, gives to no one, 249

  He who gives bread to others’ dogs is often barked at by his own, 79

  He who gives, must take (meaning a joke), 179

  He who gives quickly, gives doubly, 179 (_See_ He gives twice)

  He who gives to the poor, lends to the Lord, 180, 343

  He who goes abroad by day has no need of a lantern, 51

  He who goes everywhere gains everywhere, 51

  He who goes far from home to marry, goes either to deceive or be
  deceived, 249

  He who goes to bed with dogs, will wake up with fleas, 183, 310

  He who goes to collect wool may come back shorn, 54

  He who goes to the mill gets befloured, 86

  He who goes with wolves learns to howl, 247

  He who grasps at all, holds nothing fast (or loses all), 179, 253

  He who grasps too much holds little (or nothing) fast, 53, 86, 250

  He who grasps too much lets much fall, 186

  He who greases his cart-wheels helps his oxen, 252

  He who guesses well prophesies well, 78

  He who handles pitch, besmears himself, 184

  He who hangs out a branch wants to sell his wine, 252

  He who has a bad name is half hanged, 81

  He who has a bad tongue should have good loins, 82

  He who has a bad wife can expect no happiness, 201

  He who has a companion has a master, 48

  He who has a glass roof should not (or must not) throw stones at his
  neighbour’s (or others’), 82, 181, 253, 299, 352

  He who has a good horse in his stable may go on foot, 81

  He who has a good neighbour has a good morning, 81, 182, 379

  He who has a good nest, finds good friends, 293

  He who has a good wife can bear any evil, 201

  He who has a handsome wife, a castle on the frontier, or a vineyard
  on the roadside, is never without war, 197

  He who has a head of wax must not walk in the sun, 81

  He who has a head won’t want for a hat, 66

  He who has a mate has a master, 81

  He who has a son grown up should not call another a thief, 253

  He who has a straw tail is always in fear of its catching fire, 81

  He who has a tongue, may go to Rome, 82, 250

  He who has a trade may travel through the world, 253

  He who has a white horse and a fair wife is seldom without trouble,
  376

  He who has bad neighbours is fain to praise himself, 355

  He who has been bitten by a snake is afraid of an eel, 355

  He who has been first a novice and then an abbot, knows what the boys
  do behind the altar, 220

  He who has been stung by a scorpion is afraid of its shadow, 248

  He who has been stung by a serpent is afraid of a lizard, 79

  He who has both money and bread may choose with whom his daughter to
  wed, 248

  He who has but one coat cannot lend it, 251

  He who has crossed the ford knows how deep it is, 82

  He who has daughters is always a shepherd, 47

  He who has daughters to marry, let him give them silk to spin, 253

  He who has drunk will drink, 48

  He who has enemies, let him not sleep, 253

  He who has four and spends five, has no need of a purse, 253, 299

  He who has his purse full preaches to the poor man, 48

  He who has land has war, 82

  He who has left a rogue behind him has made a good day’s journey, 180

  He who has loaves has dogs, 81

  He who has lost his oxen is always hearing bells, 247

  He who has lost his reputation is a dead man among the living, 249

  He who has many irons in the fire will let some of them burn, 376

  He who has money has capers, 48

  He who has money to throw away, let him employ workmen, and not stand
  by, 81

  He who has no falcon must hunt with owls, 377

  He who has no head wants no hat, 224

  He who has no house of his own is everywhere at home, 220

  He who has no voice in the valley will have none in the council, 250

  He who has no wife, is for thrashing her daily; but he that has one,
  takes care of her, 220

  He who has not health has nothing, 50

  He who has not tasted bitter knows not what sweet is, 184

  He who has nothing fears nothing, 50

  He who has once burnt his mouth always blows his soup, 185

  He who has once invited the devil into his house will never be rid of
  him, 180

  He who has one foot in a brothel has the other in an hospital, 180

  He who has plenty of butter may put some in his cabbage, 378

  He who has scalded himself once blows the next time, 86

  He who has servants has unavoidable enemies, 249

  He who has sheep has fleeces, 220

  He who has teeth has no bread, and he who has bread has no teeth, 81

  He who has the luck brings home the bride, 186

  He who has the Pope for his cousin may soon be a Cardinal, 180

  He who has three enemies must agree with two, 180

  He who has to deal with a blockhead has need of much brains, 247

  He who has to do with foxes must look after his hen-roost, 183

  He who has two masters to serve must lie to one of them, 245

  He who has victory has right, 180

  He who hath an ill name is half hanged (Give a dog an ill name, and
  you may as well hang him), 80

  He who hath ears to hear, let him hear, 184

  He who heeds not the lost shoe-nail will soon lose the horse, 180

  He who helps everybody helps nobody, 252

  He who herds with wolves learns to howl, 87, 183, 377 (_See_ He who
  kennels)

  He who holds his tongue does not commit himself, 50

  He who holds the handle of the frying-pan turns it as he pleases, 53

  He who holds the ladder is as bad as the thief, 180

  He who holds the thread holds the ball, 53

  He who hunts after bargains will scratch his head (Catalan), 245

  He who hunts two hares at once catches neither, 49, 186, 343

  He who hunts two hares from one bush is not likely to catch either,
  352

  He who hunts two hares does not catch the one, and lets the other
  escape, 80

  He who hunts with cats will catch mice, 377

  He who inherits a farthing is expected to disburse a dollar, 181

  He who is afraid of doing too much always does too little, 181

  He who is afraid of leaves must not go into the wood, 82, 311

  He who is always drinking and stuffing will in time become a
  ragamuffin, 179

  He who is an ass and thinks himself a stag, finds his mistake when he
  comes to leap the ditch, 78

  He who is ashamed of asking is ashamed of learning, 375

  He who is at sea does not direct the winds, 49, 310

  He who is born to misfortune stumbles as he goes, and though he fall
  on his back will fracture his nose, 186

  He who is embarked with the devil must make the passage with him, 80,
  310

  He who is everybody’s friend is either very poor or very rich, 248

  He who is everywhere is nowhere, 373

  He who is far from home is near to harm, 376

  He who is feared by many fears many, 177

  He who is feared gets more than his own, 201

  He who is fed by another’s hand seldom gets enough, 356

  He who is guilty believes that all men speak ill of him, 80

  He who is his own teacher has a fool for his pupil, 185

  He who is in hell knows not what heaven is, 80

  He who is in the mud likes to pull another into it, 219

  He who is judge between two friends loses one of them, 49, 186

  He who is meant to be a basket-carrier is born with the handle in his
  hand, 81

  He who is not for me is against me, 184

  He who is of no use to himself is of no use to any one, 185, 353

  He who is of the craft can discourse about it, 80

  He who is quick at borrowing is slow in paying, 182

  He who is scared by words has no heart for deeds, 379

  He who is silent gains store, 247

  He who is surety for another pays for him, 311

  He who is the cause of his own misfortune may bewail it himself, 80

  He who is unable is always willing, 84

  He who is under cover when it rains is a great fool if he stirs, 80

  He who is well prepared has half won the battle, 279

  He who is without debt is without credit, 83

  He who keeps his own secret avoids much mischief, 249

  He who kennels with wolves must howl, 49 (_See_ He who herds)

  He who knows a knave makes no bid for him, 379

  He who knows but little tells it quickly (or soon), 85, 251, 292

  He who knows how to beg may leave his money at home, 356

  He who knows nothing knows enough, if he knows when to be silent, 73

  He who knows nothing never doubts, 83

  He who knows the road can ride full trot, 85

  He who laid a snare for me has fallen into it, 249

  He who laughs last laughs best, 55, 124, 186, 354

  He who laughs overmuch may have an aching heart, 67

  He who lends to the poor, gets his interest from God, 180

  He who lets the goat be laid on his shoulders is soon after forced to
  carry the cow, 86

  He who lies down in (or mixes himself with) the wash will be eaten by
  swine, 344, 379

  He who lies in the grave is well lodged, 182

  He who lies on the ground must expect to be trodden on, 179

  He who likes drinking is always talking of wine, 67

  He who listens at doors hears more than he desires, 49

  He who lives among wolves learns to howl, 87 (_See_ He who herds)

  He who lives by the church should serve the church, 181

  He who lives in hopes, breakfasts ill and sups worse, 246

  He who lives long knows what pain is, 54

  He who lives on hope dies of hunger, 186

  He who lives without restraint, will die without honour, 376

  He who looks demurely trust not with your money, 251

  He who looks not before finds himself behind, 51

  He who looks on has two-thirds of the game, 86

  He who looks on knows more of the game than he who plays, 180

  He who loses his temper is in the wrong, 52

  He who loses is always in fault, 85

  He who loses, sins, 51

  He who loves Bertrand loves his dog (Love me, love my dog), 246

  He who loves Peter won’t harm his dog, 246

  He who loves sorrow, will always find something to mourn over, 379

  He who loves well is slow to forget, 246

  He who loves well, obeys well, 246

  He who made fun of the old man, laughed at first and cried
  afterwards, 247

  He who makes a law should keep it, 220

  He who makes a mouse of himself, will be eaten by the cats (This is a
  pun; sich mausig machen means to swagger or assume undue importance),
  185

  He who makes himself a dove is eaten by the hawk, 79

  He who makes himself a servant is expected to remain a servant, 85

  He who makes himself honey will be eaten by the bees (or the flies),
  185, 311

  He who makes himself nothing, is nothing, 184

  He who makes light of his enemy dies by his hand, 246

  He who makes more of you than he is wont, either means to cheat you
  or wants you, 299

  He who makes one basket can make a hundred, 272

  He who marries a widow with three children, marries four thieves, 352

  He who marries does well, but who remains single does better, 182

  He who marries for love has good nights and bad days, 52

  He who marries ill, is long in becoming widowed, 250

  He who measures oil greases his hands, 248

  He who mixes himself with the draff will be eaten by the swine, 344,
  379

  He who never budges from Paris will never be Pope, 53

  He who passes a winter’s day passes one of his mortal enemies, 51

  He who pays his debts, betters his condition, 185

  He who pays is fairly entitled to speak his mind, 51

  He who pays well is master of another man’s purse, 76, 101, 305

  He who pays well is well served, 51

  He who pays well may borrow again, 182

  He who peeps through a hole will discover his dole (Harm watch, harm
  catch), 245

  He who pitches too high won’t get through his song, 182

  He who plants fruit-trees must not count upon the fruit, 342

  He who plays with a sword plays with the devil (Galician), 245

  He who pledges or promises runs in debt, 249

  He who ploughs with young oxen makes crooked furrows, 183

  He who pours water hastily into a bottle spills more than goes in, 248

  He who praises himself befouls himself, 86

  He who praises himself must have bad neighbours, 185

  He who praises in _præsentia_, and abuses in _absentia_, have with
  him _pestilentia_, 181

  He who prates much, lies much, 186

  He who prizes little things, is worthy of great ones, 179

  He who promises incurs a debt, 251

  He who puts by for the night, puts by for the cat, 354

  He who quits his place loses it, 52

  He who receives the offerings let him ring the bells, 250

  He who recovers but the tail of his cow does not lose all, 51

  He who reforms, God assists, 252

  He who remains in the mill grinds, not he who goes to and fro, 220

  He who rides behind another does not saddle when he will, 253

  He who rides on the giant’s shoulders sees further than he who
  carries him, 10

  He who rides the horse is his master, 354

  He who rides the mule shoes her, 50

  He who rises early will gather wisdom, 376

  He who risks nothing can gain nothing (Nothing venture, nothing
  have), 84

  He who saves, finds, 247

  He who saves in little things, can be liberal in great ones, 182

  He who says nothing never lies, 83

  He who says what he likes, must hear what he does not like, 185, 248,
  356

  He who seeks, finds, 247

  He who sees leather cut asks for a thong, 49

  He who serves is not free, 252

  He who serves many masters must neglect some, 246

  He who serves two masters must lie to one of them, 80

  He who serves the people has a bad master, 180

  He who serves the public has a sorry (or fickle) master, 85, 308

  He who shoots often, hits at last, 184

  He who sings drives away sorrow, 78

  He who slanders his neighbour makes a rod for himself, 344

  He who sleeps alone keeps long cold, two soon warm each other, 185

  He who sleeps catches no fish, 79

  He who sleeps much, learns little, 250

  He who sleeps well does not feel the fleas, 78

  He who sows brambles must not go barefoot, 252

  He who sows brambles (or thistles) reaps thorns (As you sow, so you
  shall reap), 53, 245

  He who sows hatred shall gather rue, 377

  He who sows iniquity shall reap shame, 379

  He who sows little, reaps little, 378

  He who sows money, will reap poverty, 375

  He who sows peas on the highway does not get all the pods into his
  barn, 377

  He who sows well, reaps well, 247

  He who spares vice wrongs virtue, 49, 180

  He who speaks ill of himself is praised by no one, 379

  He who spits above himself will have it fall on his face, 246 (_See_
  Who spits)

  He who stands godfather to a wolf should have a dog under his cloak,
  179

  He who stands high is seen from afar, 377

  He who stands near the woodcutter is likely to be hit by a splinter,
  377

  He who steals once is never trusty, 253

  He who stops at every stone never gets to his journey’s end, 52

  He who stops half way is only half in error, 179

  He who strikes another on the neck, does not strike far from the
  head, 377

  He who strives to do, does more than he who has the power, 231

  He who succeeds is reputed wise, 66

  He who suspects is seldom at fault, 82

  He who swears is a liar, 81

  He who takes a wife takes a master, 52

  He who takes the child by the hand, takes the mother by the heart,
  377

  He who takes no care of little things, will not have the care of
  great ones, 187

  He who takes the wrong road must make his journey again, 246

  He who talks much is sometimes right, 250

  He who tastes every man’s broth often burns his mouth, 378

  He who tells his own secret will hardly keep another’s, 79, 248

  He who threatens is afraid, 50

  He who threatens to strike, and does not, is afraid, 246

  He who throws away money with his hands will seek it with his feet, 78

  He who throws himself under the bench will be left to lie there, 356

  He who tickles himself, laughs when he likes, 185, 309, 379

  He who torments others does not sleep well, 53

  He who touches pitch defiles himself, 86, 379

  He who travels with hope, has poverty for his coachman, 183

  He who treads on eggs, must tread lightly, 181

  He who trifles with his enemy dies by his hand, 219

  He who trusts a woman and leads an ass will never be free from
  plague, 49

  He who turns aside avoids danger, 52

  He who waits for a dead man’s shoes is in danger of going barefoot,
  48, 352

  He who waits for another man’s trencher often dines in imagination
  (or with Duke Humphrey), 52

  He who waits for another’s platter has a cold meal (Catalan), 254

  He who wants a good deal must not ask for a little, 87

  He who wants a mule without fault must walk on foot, 252

  He who wants his dog killed has only to say he’s mad, 87, 246

  He who wants to be rich in a year comes to the gallows in half a
  year, 54, 87, 248

  He who wants to catch fish must not mind a wetting, 251

  He who wants to travel far takes care of his beast, 54

  He who was born to be hanged will not be drowned, unless the water go
  over the gallows, 373

  He who was born to pennies, will never be master of dollars, 376

  He who whispers, lies, 375

  He who will have eggs must bear with the cackling, 181

  He who will not obey father, will have to obey stepfather, 355

  He who will not serve one master must needs serve many, 84

  He who will not take cheap advice, will have to buy dear repentance,
  377

  He who wipes the child’s nose, means to kiss the mother’s cheek, 180

  He who won’t be advised, can’t be helped, 177

  He who works on the highway will have many advisers, 248 (_See_ He
  that builds)

  He who would be everywhere will be nowhere, 353

  He who would be long an old man must begin betimes, 87

  He who would buy a sausage of a dog must give him bacon in exchange,
  378

  He who would catch a rogue must watch behind the door, 343

  He who would catch fish must not mind wetting himself, 292

  He who would cheat a peasant, must take one with him, 181, 308

  He who would cheat the fox must rise early, 249

  He who would climb the ladder must begin at the bottom, 180

  He who would close another man’s mouth, should first tie up his own,
  377

  He who would drive another over three dikes must climb over two
  himself, 356

  He who would eat the kernel, must crack the shell (or nut), 377, 378

  He who would enjoy the feast should fast on the eve, 87

  He who would enjoy the fire must bear the smoke, 378

  He who would gather honey must brave the sting of bees, 308

  He who would gather roses, must not fear thorns, 343

  He who would go further than his horse, must alight and go on foot,
  186

  He who would hang himself is sure to find a rope, 375

  He who would have clear water should go to the fountain head, 87

  He who would have good cabbage must pay its price, 377

  He who would leap high must take a long run, 379

  He who would live at Rome must not quarrel with the Pope, 54

  He who would make a fool of himself will find many to help him, 377

  He who would make a golden door (or gate) must add a nail to it
  daily, 54, 308

  He who would not go to hell, must not go to court, 376

  He who would prosper in peace, must suffer in silence, 183

  He who would relish his food must not see it cooked, 87

  He who would rest must work, 88

  He who would rule, must hear and be deaf, see and be blind, 185

  He who would save should begin with the mouth, 378

  He who would seek revenge must be on his own guard, 379

  He who would serve everybody gets thanks from nobody, 376

  He who would steal honey, must not be afraid of bees, 378

  He who would stop every man’s mouth must have a great deal of meal,
  98 (_See_ He need have)

  He who would succeed at court, must lie sometimes low, sometimes
  high, 186

  He who would take, must give, 252

  He who would the daughter win, with the mother must begin, 180

  He who would thrive must follow the church, the sea, or the king’s
  service, 251

  He who would travel through the land, must go with open purse in
  hand, 311

  He whose house is tiled with glass should not throw stones at his
  neighbour’s, 220 (_See_ He who lives)

  He whose mistress squints, says she ogles, 187

  He will never get into the wood who starts at every bush, 373 (_See_
  He that examines)

  He will not lose his oats for want of braying, 24

  He would be a good one to send for death, 95

  He would be wise who knew all things beforehand, 327

  He would bite a cent in two, 328

  He would break his neck against a straw, 126

  He would drown in a spoonful of water, 125

  He would not give the devil a knife to cut his throat, 112

  He would rather have a bumper in hand than a Bible, 326

  He would sell even his share of the sun, 96

  He would slaughter a bug to drink its blood, 96

  He wriggles like an eel, 327

  Health and cheerfulness make beauty; finery and cosmetics cost money
  and lie, 255

  Health without money is a half-malady, 125

  Hear first, and speak afterwards, 222

  Hear one man before you answer; hear several before you decide, 375

  Hear, see, and say nothing if you would live in peace, 44, 116, 290

  Hear the other side, and believe little, 116

  Hearsay is half lies, 153, 329

  Heavy purses and light hearts can sustain much, 345

  Hedgehogs are not to be killed with the fist, 287

  Hedges have no eyes, but they have ears, 109

  Hell is paved with (or full of) good intentions, 91, 218, 274

  Help is good everywhere, except in the porridge-bowl, 374

  Help yourself and God will help you, 321, 374

  Hens like to lay where they see an egg, 305

  Herod and Pilate are good friends, 152

  Herring in the land, the doctor at a stand, 321

  Hide not the truth from your confessor, your doctor, or your lawyer,
  69

  Hide not your light under a bushel, 160

  High birth is a poor dish on the table, 106

  High houses are mostly empty in the upper story, 152

  High trees give more shadow than fruit, 328

  Him who errs, forgive once, but never twice, 197

  Hired horses make short miles, 319

  His bread fell into the honey, 208

  His hens lay eggs with two yolks, 168

  His horse’s head is too big, it cannot get out of the stable, 57

  His money takes the place of wisdom, 345

  Hobby horses are dearer than Arabians, 170

  Hold your dog in readiness before you start the hare, 305

  Home, dear home, small as thou art, to me thou art a palace, 77

  Honest Nobody is to blame for all, 139

  Honest poverty is thinly sown, 20

  Honesty lasts longest (Honesty is the best policy), 142

  Honey is not for asses (or the ass’s mouth), 32, 237, 285

  Honey is sweet, but the bee stings, 32, 305

  Honeyed speech often conceals poison and gall, 400

  Honour a good man that he may honour you, and a bad man that he may
  not dishonour you, 279

  Honour and profit will not keep in one sack, 279

  Honour blossoms on the grave, 20

  Honour once lost never returns, 341

  Honour the old, teach the young, 354

  Honour the tree that gives you shelter, 389

  Honours change manners, 35, 99, 304

  Hope and expectation are a fool’s income, 372

  Hope is an egg of which one man gets the yolk, another the white, and
  a third the shell, 372

  Hope is the dream of the waking, 372

  Horse, don’t die yet, grass is coming, 40

  Horses run after benefices, and asses get them, 34

  Hour by hour time departs, 68

  How can the cat help it if the maid be a fool?, 77

  How did you rear so many children? By being fondest of the little
  ones, 272

  How easily a hair gets into the butter!, 187

  How many daily read the Word, and yet from vice are not deterred (How
  many daily read the Bible, and yet pursue their course of evil), 188

  How shall the enemy of the bride speak well of the wedding?, 219

  How we apples swim! said the horse-t—d, 344

  However bright the sun may shine, leave not your cloak at home, 242

  However foul it be, never say, Of this water I will not drink, 242

  However high a bird may soar, it seeks its food on earth, 369

  Hunger and cold surrender a man to his enemy, 224, 278

  Hunger changes beans into almonds, 106

  Hunger drives the wolf out of the wood, 28, 106, 138, 329

  Hunger eats through stone walls, 329

  Hunger is the best cook, 153

  Hunger is the best sauce, 1, 106, 329, 380

  Hunger looks in at the industrious man’s door but dares not enter, 28

  Hungry flies bite sore, 153, 332

  Husband, don’t see; wife, be blind, 231

  Husband, you are a cuckold: wife, who told you so?, 209

  Hush, brideswoman, I knew all that before, 198

  Hussars pray for war, and the doctor for fever, 153


  I.

  I a lazy lout, you a lazy lout, marry me, Antonia, 262

  “I am a judge of cresses,” said the peasant, as he was eating
  hemlock, 382

  I am like you and you like me, the devil united us, 262

  I am neither at the ford nor the bridge, 230

  I am not here to catch flies, 329

  I am on good terms with the friend who eats his bread with me, 269

  I being satisfied, the world is satisfied, 89

  I broke my leg, perhaps for my good, 245

  I can see as far into a mill-stone as another man, 153

  I do not tell thee what thou art, thou wilt tell it thyself, 235

  I don’t count them to you, wife, but a hog makes twelve puddings, 233

  I don’t want it, I don’t want it, but put it into my hood, 236

  I hate fetters though they be of gold, 267

  I have a good jacket in France, 206

  I have a mouth which I feed, it must speak what I please, 329

  “I have had” is a poor man, 151

  “I have” is a better bird than “If I had,”, 151

  I have nothing for dinner, sit down to table, 286

  I kiss thee, hide, because thou art to be a wine-bag, 268

  I know by my own pot how the others boil, 28

  I know well what I say when I ask for bread, 205

  I know what I know, but will say nothing about it, 262

  I left what I knew for what I heard praised, and repented, 241

  “I’ll go myself,” and “I’ll see to it,” are two good servants on a
  farm, 369

  I’ll marry, and eat the prime of the pot, and sit down first, 208

  I’ll sleep on it, 329

  I may go over my reckoning, but not over my time, 329

  I meant to cross (or bless) myself and put out one of my eyes, 239,
  278

  I mistress and you miss, who is to sweep the house?, 262

  I neither give nor take, like a Jew on the Sabbath, 230

  I never saw a silent rich man, 28

  I never was satisfied with “I will, I will.” One “take this” is
  better than two “I will give you,”, 211

  I renounce the friend who eats what is mine with me, and what is his
  own by himself, 267

  I renounce the golden basin in which I have to spit blood, 267

  I saw a man, who saw another man, who saw the sea, 295

  I saw you at Lucca, I knew you at Pisa, 70

  I say it to you, daughter; hear it, daughter-in-law, 91, 203

  I see by my daughter’s face when the devil lays hold of my
  son-in-law, 287

  I see by my mother-in-law’s eyes when the devil takes hold of her
  (Galician), 237

  I stubborn and you stubborn, who is to carry the load?, 262

  I thought I had no husband, and I eat up the stew, 240

  I thought to cross (or bless) myself, and put out my eye, 239, 278

  I too can lead the geese to water when it rains, 72

  I want more for my teeth than for my relations, 281

  I want no drones in my beehive (_So Shakspeare_, “Drones hive not
  with me.”—_Shylock_), 153

  I will do what I can, and a little less, to be able to continue at
  it, 98

  “I will not bite any dog,” says the shepherd’s dog, “for I must save
  my teeth for the wolf,”, 153

  I will win the horse or lose the saddle, 153

  I would rather have a dog my friend than enemy, 153

  I would rather see smoke from my own chimney than the fire on
  another’s hearth, 374

  Idleness is hunger’s mother, and of theft it is full brother, 331

  Idleness is the devil’s bolster, 384

  Idleness is the root of all evil, 162

  If a beard were all, the goat would be the winner, 402

  If a man has folly in his sleeve, it will be sure to peep out, 376

  If a man would know what he is, let him anger his neighbours, 186

  If a man would learn to pray let him go often to sea, 54

  If a poor man gives to you, he expects more in return, 294

  If envy were a fever, all the world would be ill, 402

  If every one were wise, a fool would be the prize, 174

  If folly were a pain, there would be groaning in every house, 257

  If fools ate no bread, corn would be cheap, 178, 345

  If God bids thee draw, he will find thee a rope; if he bids thee
  ride, he will find thee a horse, 349

  If God gives not bushelfuls, he gives spoonfuls, 371

  If he waits long enough, the world will be his own, 299

  If I am a fool, put your finger in my mouth, 258

  If I am seen, I am joking; if I am not seen, I steal, 169

  If I am to be drowned, it shall be in clean water, 169

  If I have lost the ring I still have the fingers, 125, 258

  “If I rest, I rust,” says the key, 166

  If I sleep, I sleep for myself; if I work, I know not for whom, 126

  If I went to sea I should find it dry, 125

  If it is to be luck, the bull may as well calve as the cow, 391

  If it only depends on swearing, the cow is ours, 56

  If it rained maccaroni, what a fine time for gluttons!, 126

  If lies are to find belief, they must be patched with truth, 397

  If lies were Latin, there would be many learned men, 403

  If one, two, three say you are an ass, put on a tail, 258

  If one won’t another will, 330

  If pride were an art, how many doctors we should have, 125

  If some men know who some men were, then some would pay the more
  honour there, 178

  If the beard were all, the goat might preach, 357

  If the bitch were not in such haste, she would not litter blind
  puppies, 142

  If the child cries, let the mother hush it, and if it will not be
  hushed, let it cry, 257

  If the eyes don’t see, the heart won’t break, 238

  If the hen did not cackle, no one would know what she had been about,
  357

  If the hen had not cackled we should not know she had laid an egg, 126

  If the landlady is fair, the wind is fair, 154

  If the mountain will not go to Mahomet, Mahomet must go to the
  mountain, 257

  If the pitcher knocks against a stone, woe to the pitcher; and if the
  stone knocks against the pitcher, woe to the pitcher, 257

  If the prince wants an apple, his servants take the tree, 177

  If the rings are lost, here are the fingers still, 125, 258

  If the servant grows rich and the master poor, they are both good for
  nothing, 177

  If the sky falls, hold up your hands, 256

  If the sky falls there will be pots broken, 256

  If the sky were to fall we should catch plenty of larks, 56

  If the sun shines on me I care not for the moon, 125

  If the weather is fine, put on your cloak; if it rains, do as you
  please, 56

  If the wife sins, the husband is not innocent, 125

  If the wolf had stayed in the wood there would have been no hue and
  cry after him, 136

  If the wolf would cease his running, the people would cease their
  shouting, 159

  If the young man knew, if the old man could, there is nothing but
  would be done, 125

  If there be a hell, Rome is built over it, 178

  If there were no receiver there would be no thief, 236

  If this ball does not stick to the wall, it will at least leave a
  mark, 257

  If thou touchest pitch thou shalt be defiled, 321 (_See_ He who
  touches)

  If thoughts were legal witnesses, many an honest man would be proved
  a rogue, 402

  If we pay for the music we will join in the dance, 56, 136

  If wishes were true, shepherds would be kings (If wishes would bide,
  beggars would ride), 57

  If wood-hewing were an order, there would be fewer monks, 174

  If you are a mouse don’t follow frogs, 126

  If you are an anvil, be patient; if you are a hammer, strike hard, 136

  If you cannot get the bird, get one of its feathers, 367

  If you cannot heal the wound, do not tear it open, 363

  If you cannot say it, point to it with your finger, 57

  If you can’t bite, don’t show your teeth, 126

  If you can’t get it in bushels, take it in spoonfuls, 152

  If you eat it up at supper, you cannot have it at breakfast, 257

  If you have a friend who is a doctor, make your bow and send him to
  the house of your enemy, 258

  If you have a friend who is a physician, send him to the house of
  your enemy, 294

  If you have a loitering servant, set his dinner before him and send
  him on an errand, 197

  If you have a sore eye wipe it with your elbow (Elbow-grease is a
  great preventive of disease), 32

  If you have learnt to wait, you may be Queen of Sweden, 374

  If you have no arrows in your quiver, go not with archers, 152

  “If you have no money, turn placeman!” as the court fool said to his
  prince, 152

  If you let them put the calf on your shoulders, it will not be long
  before they clap on the cow, 126

  If you listen at a hole, you will hear ill of yourself as well as
  others, 222

  If you love me, John, your acts will tell me so, 256

  If you pay what you owe, what you’re worth you’ll know, 238

  If you pull one pig by the tail all the rest squeak, 339

  If you want clear water, draw it from the spring, 294

  If you want fire, look for it in the ashes, 181

  If you want to be dead, wash your head and go to bed, 257

  If you want to be revenged, hold your tongue, 256

  If you want to beat a dog, say he eat your iron, 239

  If you want to know secrets, seek for them in trouble or in pleasure,
  257

  If you want to know what a ducat (or dollar) is worth, try to borrow
  one, 257, 294

  If you want to thrash your wife, ask her for a drink of water in the
  sun, 257 (_i.e._ to find fault with its impurity)

  If you will stir up the mire, you must bear the smell, 379

  If you wish to be well served, serve yourself, 257, 294

  If you would be a good judge, hear what every one says, 294

  If you would be healthy, be wise betimes, 294

  If you would catch a fox you must hunt with geese, 392

  If you would earn (or deserve) fame, let not the sun shine on you (or
  find you) in bed, 257

  If you would grow poor without perceiving it, employ workmen and go
  to sleep, 294

  If you would have the dog follow you, give him bread, 253, 299

  If you would have the lamp burn, you must pour oil into it, 169

  If you would have your work ill done, pay beforehand, 87

  If you would make a thief honest, trust him, 253

  If you’ve money, take a seat; if you’ve none, take to your feet, 152

  If your head is made of butter, don’t be a baker, 57 (_See_ He who
  has a head)

  If youth knew! if age could!, 56 (_See_ If the young man, &c.)

  Ill befal the belly that forgets eaten bread, 282

  Ill begun, ill done, 331

  Ill fares the young bird in the urchin’s hand, 282

  Ill got, ill spent, 171

  Ill-gotten goods never prosper, 172

  Ill in kine and worse in beeves, 109

  Ill luck comes by pounds and goes away by ounces, 102

  Ill luck enters by fathoms and departs by inches, 218

  Ill luck is good for something, 5

  Ill luck upon ill luck, and a stone for a pillow, 230

  Ill-matched horses draw badly, 336

  Ill news comes apace (or travels fast), 77, 115

  Ill tidings come soon enough, 331

  Ill weeds are not hurt by frost, 262, 277

  Ill weeds grow apace, 38, 106, 331, 336

  Ill weeds grow the fastest and last the longest, 394

  In a calm sea every man is a pilot, 177

  In a golden sheath a leaden knife, 104

  In a smith’s house the knife is wooden, 221

  In a wood don’t walk behind another, 242

  In at one ear and out at the other, 91, 120, 277

  In borrowing an angel, in repaying a devil, 6

  In default of bread, meal cakes are good, 265

  In eating ’tis good to begin, one morsel helps the other in, 318

  In frosty weather a nail is worth a horse, 222

  In hawks, hounds, arms, and love, for one pleasure a thousand pains,
  16

  In hunting and in love you begin when you like, and leave off when
  you can, 221

  In less than a thousand years we shall all be bald, 200

  In marriage cheat who can, 17

  In men every mortal sin is venial, in women every venial sin is
  mortal, 68

  In my own house I am a king, 232

  In old houses many mice, in old furs many lice, 154

  In prosperity caution, in adversity patience, 329

  In prosperity no altars smoke, 111

  In prosperity think of adversity, 330

  In small woods may be caught large hares, 329

  In still water are the largest fish, 381

  In still water the worms are worst, 381

  In the division of inheritance friendship standeth still, 329

  In the end it will be known who ate the bacon, 2

  In the evening one may praise the day, 134

  In the fiddler’s (or bagpiper’s) house every one is a dancer, 17, 221

  In the fray the weak are strong, 111

  In the garden more grows than the gardener sows, 233

  In the land of promise a man may die of hunger, 329

  In the land of the blind blessed is he that hath one eye, 104

  In the land of the blind the one-eyed is a king, 329

  In the long run the greyhound kills the hare, 195, 288

  In the looking-glass we see the form, in wine the heart, 153

  In the report of riches and goodness always bate one half, 211

  In the rich woman’s house she always commands; he never, 221

  In the tail lies the venom, 3

  In the war of love who flies conquers, 111

  In time a mouse will gnaw through a cable, 334

  In time of war the devil makes more room in hell, 150

  In too much disputing truth is lost, 44

  In war, hunting, and love, for one pleasure a hundred pains, 279

  In war it is best to tie your horse to a strange manger, 380

  In war time there is pay for every horse, 104

  Incense intoxicates, and every one wishes for it, 33

  Industry is the parent of fortune, 148

  Ingratitude is the world’s reward, 171

  Ingratitude sickens benevolence, 171

  Injurious is the gift that takes away freedom, 90

  Intemperance is the doctor’s wet-nurse, 172

  Invite your son-in-law to a fowl, and he will take away the lemon, 209

  Iron may be rubbed so long that it gets heated, 42

  Iron not used soon rusts, 278

  It befits the king to be liberal, for he is sure of never falling
  into poverty, 266

  It dawns none the sooner for all one’s early rising, 286

  It does not become the sparrow to mix in the dance of the cranes, 363

  It does not depend upon the dog when the horse shall die, 363

  It fares ill with the house when the distaff commands the sword, 209,
  282

  It flows like a fountain from a broomstick, 325

  It goes ill in the house where the hen sings and the cock is silent,
  260

  It grieveth one dog that the other goeth into the kitchen, 323

  It hangs upon a silken thread, 322

  It has been blowing hard—the dirt has been blown into high places, 362

  It is a bad game where nobody wins, 98

  It is a bad hand that refuses to guard the head, 359

  It is a bad hen that eats at your house and lays at another’s, 235

  It is a bad hen that lays her eggs away from the farm, 359

  It is a bad hen that lays in neighbours’ houses, 171

  It is a bad horse that does not earn his fodder, 143

  It is a bad sheep that is too lazy to carry its own fleece, 361

  It is a bad thing to be a knave, but worse to be known for one, 96

  It is a bad well into which one must put water, 136, 323, 359

  It is a bold mouse that makes her nest in the cat’s ear, 359

  It is a good file that cuts iron without making a noise, 75

  It is a good horse that never stumbles, 25

  It is a great art to laugh at your own misfortunes, 361

  It is a grief to one beggar that another stands at the door, 323

  It is a hard morsel that chokes, 323

  It is a lazy bird that will not build its own nest, 359

  It is a long lane that has no turning, 323

  It is a loss of soap to wash the ass’s head, 228

  It is a poor fox that has but one hole, 145

  It is a poor horse that is not worth its oats, 359

  It is a poor mouse that has but one hole, 323, 347

  It is a poor roast that gives no dripping, 359

  It is a sorry house in which the cock is silent and the hen crows,
  60, 128 (_See_ It fares ill and It goes ill)

  It is a wise child that knows its own father, 146, 217, 359

  It is all one whether you are bit by a dog or a bitch, 7

  It is all one whether you die of sickness or love, 128

  It is always good to have two strings to your bow, 97

  It is always well to keep hold of your horse’s bridle, 21

  It is an ill bird that fouls its own nest, 146, 201, 267

  It is an ill turn that does no good to any one, 359

  It is approved alchemy to have an income and spend nothing, 198, 265

  It is as bad to spit out the fire and be shamed, as it is to swallow
  it and be burnt, 362

  It is as well to be naked as to have no covering, 361

  It is bad baking without flour and water, 165

  It is bad for puppies to play with bear-cubs, 380

  It is bad iron in which there is no steel, 361

  It is bad marketing with empty pockets, 334

  It is bad preaching to deaf ears, 170

  It is bad to be between two fires, 361

  It is bad to have a servant, but worse to have a master, 282

  It is bad to lean against a falling wall, 394

  It is best to play with equals, 384

  It is better the child should cry than the father, 146

  It is better to be the first of one’s race than the last (meanest), 27

  It is better to be the hammer than the anvil, 27

  It is better to bend than break, 27

  It is better to blow than burn your mouth, 322

  It is better to buy dearly than to hunger direly, 350

  It is better to deal with a whole fool than half a fool, 146

  It is better to have a husband without love than jealous, 110

  It is better to have to do with God than with his saints, 26

  It is better to hear the nightingale sing than the mouse gnaw, 97

  It is better to irritate a dog than an old woman, 97

  It is better to leap over the ditch than trust to the pleadings of
  good men, 232

  It is better to leave than to lack, 96

  It is better to leave the child’s nose dirty than wring it off, 22

  It is better to lose than lose more (The first loss is the best), 232

  It is better to make conditions in the bush than in prison, 349

  It is better to scrape the cheese than to peel it, 363

  It is better to strive with a stubborn ass than to carry the wood on
  one’s back, 231

  It is better to turn back than go astray, 171

  It is bitter fare to eat one’s own words, 360

  It is courage that vanquishes in war, and not good weapons, 199

  It is cowardly to fly from a living enemy, or to abuse a dead one, 384

  It is dangerous to eat cherries with the great, they throw the stones
  at your head, 359

  It is dear-bought butter that is licked off a woolcomb, 358

  It is dear honey that must be licked off thorns, 170

  It is difficult to get many heads under one hat, 361

  It is difficult to hide what everybody knows, 361

  It is difficult to spit honey out of a mouth full of gall, 361

  It is difficult to tie an unborn horse to the manger, 372

  It is difficult to trap an old fox, 394

  It is easier to blame than do better, 170

  It is easier to build two hearths than always to keep a fire on one,
  146

  It is easier to fill a rogue’s belly than his eyes, 386

  It is easier to get away from the bank than the bottom, 21

  It is easier to guard against a bushel of fleas than a woman, 146

  It is easier to make a lady of a peasant-girl than a peasant-girl of
  a lady, 332

  It is easier to stem the brook than the river, 349

  It is easy robbing when the dog is quieted, 121

  It is easy to be generous out of another man’s purse, 323, 360

  It is easy to bid the devil be your guest, but difficult to get rid
  of him, 361

  It is easy to cut thongs from other men’s leather, 324 (_See_ Good
  thongs)

  It is easy to find a stick to beat a dog, 98, 332

  It is easy to find the rod when another finds the bottom, 361

  It is easy to give advice when all goes well, 122

  It is easy to help him who is willing to be helped, 185

  It is easy to manage when fortune favours, 360

  It is easy to poke another man’s fire, 360

  It is easy to preach fasting with a full belly, 95

  It is easy to sit at the helm in fine weather, 371

  It is easy to stride a tree when it is down, 361

  It is easy to swim, when another holds up your head, 360

  It is easy to threaten a bull from a window, 95

  “It is easy to work with a good comb,” said the devil, when he combed
  his mother’s hair with a pitchfork, 360

  It is fair and just to cheat the cheater, 225

  It is folly to drown on dry land, 358

  It is folly to fear what one cannot avoid, 351

  It is folly to gape against an oven, 11, 361

  It is folly to sing twice to a deaf man, 358

  It is folly to take a thorn out of another’s foot and put it into
  your own, 358

  It is good fishing in troubled waters, 43, 202, 329

  It is good living under the shadow of the belfry, 126

  It is good rowing with set sail, 336

  It is good sailing with wind and tide, 341

  It is good speaking that improves good silence, 323

  It is good spinning from another’s yarn, 324

  It is good to be a priest at Easter, child in Lent, peasant at
  Christmas, and foal in harvest-time, 360

  It is good to beat a proud man when he is alone, 21

  It is good to buy when another wants to sell, 95

  It is good to go afoot when one is tired of riding, 324

  It is good to have friends everywhere, 21, 95

  It is good to hold the clothes of one who is swimming, 95

  It is good to lend to God and to the soil—they pay good interest, 360

  It is good to sleep in a whole skin, 134, 323, 360

  It is good to warm oneself by another’s fire, 324

  It is hard to blow with a full mouth, 334

  It is hard to catch birds with an empty hand, 162

  It is hard to catch hares with unwilling hounds, 334

  It is hard to find a pin in the dark, 324

  It is hard to glean after a niggardly husbandman, 394

  It is hard to labour with an empty belly, 362

  It is hard to lure hawks with empty hands, 361

  It is hard to make a fire on a cold hearth, 361

  It is hard to pay for bread that has been eaten, 395

  It is hard to please every one, 317

  It is hard to sail without wind, and to grind without water, 394

  It is hard to steal where the host himself is a thief, 146, 324
  (_See_ It is not easy)

  It is hard to swim against the stream, 338

  It is hard to teach an old dog tricks, 361

  It is hard to teach old dogs to bark, 137, 336

  It is hard to track the path the ship follows in the ocean, 356

  It is harder work getting to hell than to heaven, 154

  It is ill catching hares with drums, 324

  It is ill sailing against wind and tide, 338

  It is in putting it into the oven that the loaf is made crooked, 196

  It is in vain for a man to rise early who has the repute of lying in
  bed all the morning, 20

  It is in vain to cast nets in a river where there are no fish, 221

  It is in vain to lay a net in sight of the birds, 104

  It is in vain to lead the ox to the water if he is not thirsty, 41

  It is just that the priest should live by the altar, 21

  It is loving too much to die of love, 12

  It is more necessary to guard the mouth than the chest, 146

  It is no child’s play when an old woman dances, 146, 358

  It is no honour for an eagle to vanquish a dove, 112

  It is no time to play chess when the house is on fire, 112

  It is no use hiding from a friend what is known to an enemy, 362

  It is not all gold that glitters, 358

  It is not all who turn their backs that flee, 352

  It is not always good to be wise, 176

  It is not easy to guard the hen that lays her eggs abroad, 361

  It is not easy to know your butter in another man’s cabbage, 360

  It is not easy to pluck hairs from a bald pate, 361

  It is not easy to show the way to a blind man, 68

  It is not easy to steal in thieves’ houses, 96 (_See_ It is hard to
  steal)

  It is not easy to sting a bear with a straw, 360

  It is not easy to walk upon the devil’s ice, 360

  It is not enough to aim, you must hit, 91

  It is not enough to have cabbage, one must have something to grease
  it, 10

  It is not enough to know how to steal, one must know also how to
  conceal, 111

  It is not enough to run; one must start in time, 11

  It is not every flower that smells sweet, 113

  It is not every hog that the crow will ride, 359

  It is not every man that can carry a falcon on his hand, 360

  It is not every one who takes the right sow by the ear, 360

  “It is not for my own sake,” said the fox, “that I say there is a
  good goose-green in the wood,”, 382

  It is not for nothing that the devil lays himself down in the ditch,
  360

  It is not for the good of the cow when she is driven in a carriage,
  358

  It is not for the swan to teach eaglets to sing, 358

  It is not good to be the poet of a village, 146

  It is not in the pilot’s power to prevent the wind from blowing, 235

  It is not necessary to fish up every bucket that falls into the well,
  112

  It is not the big oxen that do the best day’s work, 34

  It is not the cowl that makes the friar, 305

  It is not the fine, but the coarse and ill-spun that breaks, 237

  It is not the greatest beauties that inspire the most profound
  passion, 10

  It is not the hen which cackles most that lays most eggs, 322

  It is not the load but the overload that kills, 236

  It is not the long day, but the heart that does the work, 102

  It is not the surplice that makes parson or clerk, 382

  It is not till the cow has lost her tail that she discovers its
  value, 178

  It is nothing at all, only a woman drowning, 10

  It is nothing, they are only thrashing (or killing) my husband, 235,
  285

  It is of no use making shoes for geese, 358

  It is only at the tree loaded with fruit that people throw stones, 42

  It is only good bargains that ruin, 26

  It is only the bashful that lose, 26

  It is only the blind who ask why they are loved who are fair, 363

  It is only the first bottle that is dear, 25

  It is pleasant driving where there is no danger of upsetting, 363

  It is pleasant enough going afoot when you lead your horse by the
  bridle, 21

  It is pleasant to cut thongs of another man’s leather, 340 (_See_
  Good thongs)

  It’s pleasant to look on the rain, when one stands dry, 323

  It is poor comfort for one who has broken his leg, that another has
  broken his neck, 362

  It is prophet-drink (_i.e._ water), 324

  It is safe to lend barley to him who has oats, 353

  It is safest sailing within reach of the shore, 301

  It is the bait that lures, not the fisherman or the rod, 206, 230

  It is the master-wheel that makes the mill go round, 11

  It is the nature of the greyhound to carry a long tail, 274

  It is the old cow’s notion that she never was a calf, 21

  It is the petty expenses that empty the purse, 108

  It is the raised stick that makes the dog obey, 375

  It is the tone that makes the music, 11

  It is time enough to take off your hat when you see the man, 362

  It is too late for the bird to scream when it is caught, 60

  It is too late to come with water when the house is burnt down, 128

  It is too late to cover the well when the child is drowned, 359

  It is too late to cry “Hold hard!” when the arrow has left the bow,
  324

  It is too late to lock the stable door when the steed is stolen, 21,
  324

  It is too late to throw water on the cinders when the house is burnt
  down, 359

  It is too much to expect of a cat that she should sit by the milk and
  not lap it, 146

  It is truth that makes a man angry, 91

  It is useless to gape against an oven, 11, 361

  It is vain to fish if the hook is not baited, 104

  It is vain to fish without a hook, or learn to read without a book,
  368

  It is very savoury to eat scot free, 223

  It is well to fly low on account of the branches, 8

  It is well to have clean bread in one’s wallet, 371

  It is well to know how to be silent till it is time to speak, 270

  It is well to leave off playing when the game is at its best, 22

  It little avails the unfortunate to be brave, 196

  It must be a hard winter when one wolf devours another, 363

  It needs a cunning hand to shave a fool’s head, 325

  It needs a high wall to keep out fear, 357

  It needs a light spirit to bear a heavy fate, 357

  It needs but slight provocation to make the wolf devour the lamb, 359

  It never thunders but it rains, 115

  It sticks to his fingers, like the charity-money to the matron, 321

  It takes a good many mice to kill a cat, 357

  It takes four living men to carry one dead man out of a house, 66

  It takes many words to fill a sack, 356

  It will all come out in the soap-suds, 259

  “It will come back,” said the man, when he gave his sow pork, 362

  It will not do to keep holidays before they come, 23

  It won’t do to trifle with fire, 23

  It would be a very big book that contained all the maybes uttered in
  a day, 42

  Italian devotion and German fasting have no meaning, 403

  It’s a bad mouthful that chokes, 98

  It’s a very proud horse that will not carry his oats, 127

  It’s bad combing where there is no hair, 324

  It’s good dancing on another man’s floor, 324

  It’s good feasting in another’s hall, 324

  It’s good steering with wind and tide, 312

  It’s hard to catch hawks with empty hands (With emptie hands men may
  no haukes lure—CHAUCER), 334

  It’s ill jesting with edged tools, 324


  J.

  Jack gets on by his stupidity, 151

  Jack is as good as his master, 295

  Jacob’s voice, Esau’s hands, 154

  Jealousy is a pain which eagerly seeks what causes pain, 142

  Jest not in earnest (Motto of the Margrave of Brandenburg), 167

  Jest so that it may not turn to earnest, 195

  Jest with your equals, 389

  Jesting costs money, 225

  John has been to school to learn to be a fool, 28

  Joy and sorrow are next-door neighbours (Joy and sorrow are to-day
  and to-morrow), 148

  Joy is like the ague; one good day between two bad ones, 371

  Judges should have two ears, both alike, 166

  Justice, but not in my own house, 225

  Justice has a waxen nose, 137

  Justice oft leans to the side where the purse pulls, 400


  K.

  Keep good company and you shall be of the number, 264

  Keep not two tongues in one mouth, 389

  Keep to the little ones, and the big ones will not bite you, 374

  Keep well with your neighbours, whether right or wrong, 151

  Keep your mouth, and keep your friend, 370

  Keep your nose out of another’s mess, 375

  Keep yourself from opportunities and God will keep you from sins, 100

  Kill and thou wilt be killed, and he will be killed who kills thee,
  232

  Kill no more than you can salt, or you will have tainted meat, 398

  Kin or no kin, woe to him who has nothing, 118

  Kind words and few are a woman’s ornament, 403

  Kind words don’t wear out the tongue, 401

  Kind words heal friendship’s wounds, 371

  Kindness breaks no bones, 151

  Kindred without friends, friends without power, power without will,
  will without effect, effect without profit, profit without virtue,
  are not worth a rush, 44

  Kings’ entreaties are commands, 299

  Kings have long hands, 36

  Kisses are the messengers of love, 383

  Know, cabbages, that there is spinach in the stew, 255

  Knowing hens lay even in nettles, 157


  L.

  Labour has a bitter root, but a sweet taste, 347

  Labour warms, sloth harms, 299

  “Ladies have ladies’ whims,” said crazy Ann, when she draggled her
  cloak in the gutter, 369

  Lambs don’t run into the mouth of the sleeping wolf, 384

  Large thongs of another man’s leather (_See_ Good thongs), 211

  Large trees give more shade than fruit, 99, 120

  Lasses and glasses are always in danger, 99

  Late fruit keeps well, 169

  Late repentance is seldom worth much, 397

  Laughter makes good blood, 103

  Law helps the waking, luck may come to the sleeping, 385

  Laws go the way kings direct, 196

  Laws go where dollars please, 280

  Laws have wax noses, 35

  Laws were made for rogues, 108

  Lawyers and painters can soon change white to black, 385

  Lawyers are bad Christians, 156

  Lawyers’ houses are built of fools’ heads, 35

  Lawyers’ robes are lined with the obstinacy of suitors, 109

  Lay your hand on your bosom and you will not speak ill of another, 283

  Lean meat from a fat pig, 272

  Learn thou of learned men, th’ unlearned of thee; for thus must
  knowledge propagated be, 332

  Learned fools are the greatest of all fools, 140, 149

  Leave no nail unclenched, 113

  Leave the jest at its best, 195

  Leave the minster where it is, 29

  Lend to your friend, and ask payment of your enemy, 383

  Lent, which seems so long, is short at other men’s tables, 107

  Less advice and more hands, 177

  Let a child have its will and it will not cry, 383

  Let a dog get at a dish of honey, and he will jump in with both legs,
  384

  Let a saint be ever so humble, he will have his wax taper, 381

  Let every bird sing its own note, 366

  Let every fox take care of his own tail, 117

  Let every man carry his own sack to the mill, 170, 366 (_See_ Every
  man must carry)

  Let every man look to the bread upon which he must depend, 271

  Let every man mind his own business, and leave others to theirs, 271

  Let every man mind his own business, and the cows will be well
  tended, 12

  Let every one be content with what God has given him, 271

  Let every one keep off the flies with his own tail, 117

  Let every one look to himself, and no one will be lost, 317

  Let every one sweep before his own door, 155

  Let every sheep hang by its own leg (Every man should support
  himself, and not hang upon another), 207, 270

  Let God’s waters run over God’s acres, 319

  Let him eat the tough morsel who eat the tender, 272

  Let him not be a lover who has no courage, 70

  Let him not complain of being cheated who buys cloth by the pattern,
  237

  Let him play the instrument who knows how, 249

  Let him stay at the oar who has learnt to row, 383

  Let him that has a mouth not say to another, Blow, 233

  Let him that itches scratch himself, 53, 177

  Let him who does not know you buy you, 251

  Let him who feels he has a dirty nose wipe it, 53

  Let him who is cold blow the fire, 48

  Let him who is well off hold his tongue, 177

  Let him who is well off stay where he is, 86

  Let him who would reach another a brand, beware that he do not burn
  his own hand, 378

  Let it be a husband, though it be but a log, 256

  Let lie what is too heavy to lift, 303

  Let me get over the lake, and I have no fear of the brook, 330

  Let me go warm, and folks may laugh, 199, 266

  Let no one say, “Of this water I will not drink,”, 235

  Let no one take a pawn that eats, 242

  Let no shovel-beaked bird ever enter your yard, 204

  Let not him who has a mouth ask another to blow, 299

  Let not the tongue utter what the head must pay for, 235, 284

  Let not thy right hand know what thy left hand doeth, 158

  Let not your shirt know all your thoughts (or your secret), 48, 117,
  129

  Let people talk and dogs bark, 158

  Let the blood be ever so thin, it is always thicker than water, 351

  Let the dead rest, 158

  Let the devil get into the church, and he will mount the altar, 158

  Let the dog bark so he don’t bite me, 226, 280

  Let the giver be silent and the receiver speak, 271

  Let the guest go before the storm bursts, 158

  Let the guts be full, for it is they that carry the legs, 228, 268

  Let the injurer not forget, 84

  Let the miracle be wrought, though it be by the devil, 223

  Let the sun shine on me, for I care not for the moon, 220

  Let them talk of me, and beg of me, 212

  Let them whip me in the market-place, provided it be not known at
  home, 204

  Let there be food in the pigeon-house, and the pigeons will come to
  it, 204, 235

  Let there be writing before you pay, and receipt before you write, 222

  Let those pater-nosters be for your own soul (Ironical against
  swearing), 242

  Let us first catch the bear and then sell its skin, 120

  Let us have florins and we shall find cousins, 65

  Let what is lost go for God’s sake, 229

  Liars should have good memories, 101, 159

  Liberal hands make many friends, 396

  Lies and gossip have a wretched offspring, 385

  Lies and Latin go round the world, 385

  Lies have short legs, 75, 159

  Lies melt like snow, 159

  Life at court is often a short cut to hell, 374

  Life is half spent before one knows what life is, 31

  Light burdens borne far become heavy, 6, 158

  Light gains make a heavy purse, 332

  Light is bad for sore eyes, 3

  Light is light, though the blind man see it not, 158

  Lightly come, lightly go, 332

  Like a collier’s sack, bad without and worse within, 209

  Like blood, like means, and like age, make the happiest marriage, 150

  Like box-makers, more noise than work, 55

  Like father, like son, 292

  Like king, like law; like law, like people, 292

  Like King Petaud’s court, where every one is master, 11

  Like lips, like lettuce, 73, 187

  Like master, like man, 58, 127, 187, 345

  Like plays best with like, 384

  Like pot, like cover, 345

  Like saint, like incense (or offering), 56, 73

  Like to like, Jack to Gill, a penny a pair, 319

  Like well like bucket, 73

  Like will to like, 53, 126

  Like will to like—a scabbed horse and a sandy dike, 397

  “Like will to like,” as the devil said to the coal-burner, 150

  Like will to like, be they poor or rich, 317

  Link by link the coat of mail is made, 37

  Lion-skins were never had cheap, 26

  Lip courtesy avails (or pleases) much and costs little, 118, 209

  Listeners hear no good of themselves, 248

  Little and often makes a heap in time, 177

  Little beard, little modesty, 200, 240

  Little bird, little nest, 194

  Little brooks make great rivers, 35

  Little by little one goes far, 240

  Little by little the bird builds its nest, 45

  Little children and headaches, great children and heartaches, 98

  Little children, little sorrows; big children, great sorrows, 398

  Little chips kindle the fire, and big logs sustain it, 291

  Little enemies and little wounds are not to be despised, 157

  Little fish are sweet (All is fish that comes to the net), 330

  Little folks are fond of talking about what great folks do, 141

  Little is done where many command, 296

  Little pitchers have long ears, 45

  Little pots soon run (or boil) over, 157, 330

  Little presents maintain friendship, 35

  Little saints also perform miracles, 398

  Little sorrows are loud, great ones silent, 398

  Little strokes fell great oaks, 330

  Little thieves are hanged by the neck, great ones by the purse, 105,
  330

  Little thieves have iron chains, and great thieves gold ones, 330

  Little wood, much fruit, 343

  Live according to your means, 389

  Live and learn, 132

  Live and let live, 132, 158, 333

  Loaves put awry into the oven come out awry, 3

  Locks and keys are not made for honest fingers, 167

  Long absence changes friends, 37

  Long borrowed is not given, 158

  Long choosing and cheapening ends in buying nothing, or bad wares, 183

  Long fasting is no bread sparing, 158, 331

  Long is not for ever, 158

  Long life to the conqueror, 262

  Long talk makes short days, 37

  Long-talked-of (or looked-for) comes at last, 159

  Long tongue, short hand, 37, 109

  Longer than a day without bread, 120

  Look before you leap, 100, 145

  Look for the hog at the oak, 72

  Look not a gift horse in the mouth, 2, 66, 149, 194, 313, 389

  Look with suspicion on the flight of an enemy, 106

  Lords and fools speak freely, 374

  Lose no rights and commit no extortions, 230

  Love, a cough, smoke, and money, cannot long be hid (or are hard to
  hide), 4, 4, 71, 159

  Love and faith are seen in works, 216, 287

  Love and lordship like no fellowship, 4, 71, 265

  Love and poverty are hard to conceal, 347

  Love begins at home, 158

  Love Bertrand love his dog, 48

  Love demands faith, and faith firmness, 71

  Love does much, money everything, 4, 158, 199

  Love does wonders, but money makes marriage, 30

  Love expels jealousy, 30

  Love, fire, a cough, the itch, and gout, are hard to conceal, 158

  Love, grief, and money cannot be kept secret, 199

  Love grows with obstacles (A wall between increases love), 158

  Love has no law, 265

  Love is an excuse for its own faults, 91

  Love is blind, but sees afar, 71

  Love is master of all arts, 93

  Love is the true price at which love is bought, 71

  Love knows hidden paths, 158

  Love knows no law, 287

  Love knows not labour, 71

  Love levels all inequalities, 116

  Love makes labour light, 332

  Love makes time pass away, and time makes love pass away, 30

  Love me little and love me long, 2, 70, 365

  Love me, love my dog, 78 (_See_ Love Bertrand)

  Love one that does not love you, answer one that does not call you,
  and you will run a fruitless race, 198

  Love others well, but love thyself the most; give good for good, but
  not to thine own cost, 300

  Love rules his kingdom without a sword, 71

  Love rules without law, 71

  Love subdues everything except the felon heart, 4

  Love teaches asses to dance, 30

  Love, thieves, and fear, make ghosts, 158

  Love without return is like a question without an answer, 158

  Love your friend with his faults, 70

  Love your neighbour, but don’t pull down the fence, 158

  Lovers’ purses are tied with cobwebs, 105

  Lovers’ quarrels are love redoubled, 267

  Lovers think others are blind (or have no eyes), 119, 240

  Love’s anger is fuel to love, 159

  Love’s merchandise is jealousy and broken faith, 71

  Love’s plant must be watered with tears and tendered with care, 383

  Loving and singing are not to be forced, 159

  Luck comes to those who look after it, 261

  Luck has but a slender anchorage, 385

  Luck has much for many, but enough for no one, 385

  Luck is better than a hundred marks, 350

  Luck (or Fortune) taps at the door and inquires whether prudence is
  within, 385 (_See_ Fortune)

  Luck will carry a man across a brook if he is not too lazy to leap,
  385

  Lying and gossiping go hand in hand, 219

  Lying is the first step to the gallows, 159

  Lying pays no tax, 289


  M.

  Mad dogs get their coats torn, 369

  Mad love—I for you, and you for another, 199, 265

  Maidens say no, and mean yes (Maids say nay, and take), 159

  Make a silver bridge for a flying enemy, 196, 266

  Make good flour and you need no trumpet (_So_: Good wine needs no
  bush), 224, 277

  Make hay while the sun shines, 160, 174

  Make me a prophet, and I will make you rich, 98

  Make the night night, and the day day, and you will live pleasantly,
  277

  Make use of the sun while it shines, 388

  Make way for a madman and a bull, 197

  Make your son your heir and not your steward, 277

  Make yourself a sheep and the wolves will eat you, 52, 86, 186

  Make yourself an ass and every one will lay his sack on you, 186

  Make yourself honey and the flies will eat you, 98, 277, 294

  Man is fire, woman is tow, and the devil comes and blows (or with a
  bellows), 37, 217, 288

  Man loves but once, 139

  Man proposes and God disposes, 37, 139, 217, 226, 230, 279, 306, 390

  Man without woman is head without body; woman without man is body
  without head, 161

  Manual jokes are clowns’ jokes, 28, 206, 225

  Many a cow stands in the meadow and looks wistfully at the common, 387

  Many a good cow has a bad calf, 161

  Many a man is a good friend but a bad neighbour, 387

  Many a man labours for the day he will never live to see, 387

  Many a one is good because he can do no mischief, 37

  Many a one leaves the roast who afterwards longs for the smoke ofit,
  127

  Many a one suffers for what he can’t help, 58

  Many a one threatens while he quakes for fear, 127, 161

  Many a one would like to lay his own shame on another man’s back, 387

  Many a sheep goes out woolly and comes home shorn, 387

  Many a thing whispered into one ear is heard over the whole town, 387

  Many a true word is spoken in jest, 123

  Many are brave when the enemy flies, 110

  Many can help one, 173

  Many cooks spoil the broth, 173

  Many desire the tree who pretend to refuse the fruit, 110

  Many dogs are the death of the hare, 387

  Many friends, and few helpers in need, 173

  Many go out for wool and come home shorn, 161

  Many grains of sand will sink a ship, 387

  Many hands make quick work, 173, 340

  Many have good intentions, but something comes across them, 161

  Many have too much, but none have enough, 386

  Many heads, many minds, 341

  Many heirs make small portions, 173

  Many hounds are the death of the hare, 173, 341

  Many kiss the child for the nurse’s sake, 387 (_See_ He who kisses)

  Many kiss the hand they would fain see chopped off, 233, 284

  Many little rivulets make a great river, 386

  Many littles make a mickle, 341

  Many love to praise right and do wrong, 387

  Many open a door to shut a window, 341

  Many return from the war who cannot give an account of the battle, 124

  Many scruple to spit in church, and afterwards defile the altar, 110

  Many see more with one eye than others with two, 161

  Many seek good nights and lose good days, 332

  Many shun the brook and fall into the river, 161

  Many shun the sword and come to the gallows, 161

  Many stop their noses at ambergris, 71

  Many take by the bushel and give with the spoon, 161

  Many trades, begging the best, 173

  Many words don’t fill the sack (_Scoticé_: Meikle crack fills nae
  sack), 340

  Many words go to a sackful (Many words will not fill a bushel), 302

  Marriage is heaven and hell, 140

  Marriages are not as they are made, but as they turn out, 104

  Marriages are written in heaven, 35

  Married to-day, marred to-morrow, 6

  Marry and grow tame, 208, 272

  Marry in haste and repent at leisure, 52, 86, 152, 321

  Marry, marry, and what about the housekeeping, 272

  Marry, marry, sounds well but tastes ill, 272

  Marry me without delay, mother, for my face is growing wrinkled, 280

  Marry your son when you please, your daughter when you can, 38, 77,
  208, 272, 370

  Marrying in the blood is never good, 152

  Marrying is easy, but housekeeping is hard, 152

  Martha sings well when she has had her fill, 268, 271

  Mary Busybody never wants a bad day, and Mary Drone has God to give
  and bring to her, 198

  Master’s hints are commands, 101

  Mastiff never liked greyhound (A churl never liked a gentleman), 41

  May God not so prosper our friends that they forget us, 235

  Measure thrice before you cut once, 110, 332

  Meddle not with what you don’t understand, 286

  Meddle with dirt and some of it will stick to you, 386 (_See_ He who
  touches pitch)

  Men after the modern fashion, and asses after the ancient, 100

  Men are as old as they feel, and women as they look, 100

  Men are rare, 35

  Men can bear all things except good days, 297

  Men go not laughing to heaven, 333

  Men make wealth, and women preserve it, 100

  Men must sail while the wind serveth, 333

  Men’s ignorance makes the pot boil for priests, 37

  Merchant to-day, beggar to-morrow, 152

  Merchants’ goods are ebb and flood, 331

  Michael is quits; he lost a ducat and gained a rabbit, 213

  Michael, Michael, you have no bees, and yet you sell honey!, 232, 283

  Might and courage require wit in their suite, 386

  Might is not right, 19, 319

  Milk the cow, but don’t pull off the udder, 333

  Millers and bakers do not steal, people bring to them, 162

  Millers, tailors, and weavers are not hanged, or the trade would soon
  be extinct, 162

  Mischief comes soon enough, 402

  Misers’ money goes twice to market, 214, 288

  Misfortune comes on horseback and goes away on foot, 32

  Misfortune seldom comes alone to the house, 397

  Misfortune upon misfortune is not wholesome, 37

  Misfortune, wood, and hair, grow throughout the year, 172

  Misfortunes never come single, 62, 108, 315

  Misreckoning is no payment, 161

  Money advances meacocks, 15

  Money and friendship break the arms of justice, 123

  Money borrowed is soon sorrowed, 5

  Money burns many, 5

  Money gets money, 214

  Money in the purse dispels melancholy, 149

  Money is a good servant but a bad master, 31

  Money is an epitome of human power, 101

  Money is lost only for want of money, 31

  Money is money’s brother, 101

  Money is more eloquent than a dozen members of parliament, 395

  Money is not gained by losing time, 291

  Money is power, 319

  Money is round, and rolls, 5,101

  Money is the measure of all things, 275

  Money is the sinew of war, 322

  Money lent, an enemy made, 275

  Money makes dogs dance, 46

  Money makes the man, 149

  Money rules the world, 319

  Money saved is money got (or as good as money gained), 354

  Money soothes more than the words of a cavalier (or a gentleman’s
  words), 231, 281

  Money taken, freedom forsaken, 149

  Money turns bad into good, 217

  Money wins the battle, not the long arm, 275

  Monks, mice, rats, and vermin, seldom sunder without harming, 162

  More are drowned in the bowl than in the sea, 153

  More belongs to dancing than a pair of dancing-shoes, 302

  More belongs to riding than a pair of boots, 191

  More flies are caught with a spoonful of syrup (or drop of honey)
  than with a cask of vinegar, 333, 386

  More grows in a garden than the gardener sows there, 286

  More is done with words than with hands, 162

  More luck than wit, 332

  More people are slain by suppers than by the sword, 368

  More unlucky than a dog in church, 121

  Moses (_i.e._ a Jew) does not play because he has not the means, 236

  Mother, I must have a husband, or I shall set fire to the house, 162

  Mother-in-law and daughter-in-law, storm and hail, 127

  Mother, marry me, marry me, or the gull will fly away with me, 230

  Mother, what is marrying? Spinning, bearing children, and crying,
  daughter, 230

  Mother’s love is ever in its spring, 58

  Mother’s truth keeps constant youth, 162

  Mouth and heart are wide apart, 162

  Mouth of honey, heart of gall, 269

  Month shut and eyes open, 75

  Much broth is sometimes made with little meat, 387

  Much caution does no harm, 266

  Much chatter, little wit, 284

  Much kindred, much trouble, 5

  Much laughter, little wit, 289

  Much memory and little judgment, 7

  Much money, many friends (Where money, there friends), 173

  Much never cost little, 237, 287

  Much noise and little wool, said the devil, when he was shearing the
  sow, 364 (_See_ Great cry and little wool)

  Much smoke and little roast, 110

  Much straw and little corn, 284

  Much talk little work, 341

  Much talking, much erring, 199

  Much water passes by the mill that the miller perceives not, 73

  Much water runs by while the miller sleeps, 357

  Much wisdom is lost in poor men’s mouths, 154

  Much wisdom is smothered in a poor man’s head, 329

  Much wit is lost in a poor man’s purse, 147

  Much worship, much cost, 35

  Muddy water won’t do for a mirror, 67

  Mules make a great fuss about their ancestors having been horses, 161

  Must is a hard nut, 162

  My chest locked, my soul safe, 283

  My daughter-in-law tucked up her sleeves and upset the kettle into
  the fire, 202

  My friend’s enemy is often my best friend, 161

  My gossips don’t like me because I tell them truths, 230, 282

  My life and soul at your service, but not the pack-saddle, 228, 274

  My money your money, let us go to the tavern, 283

  My neighbour’s goat gives more milk than mine, 225, 263

  My neighbour’s hen lays more eggs than mine, 226

  My No is as good as your Yes, 128

  My shirt is nearer than my cloak, 322

  My sister’s son is a kinsman beyond dispute, 239

  My teeth are nearer than my kindred, 231, 242


  N.

  National customs are national honours, 384

  Nature and love cannot be hid, 163 (_See_ Love)

  Nature draws stronger than seven oxen, 163

  Nature requires little, fancy much, 163

  Near is my petticoat, but nearer is my smock, 120

  Near the church far from God, 132

  Necessity becomes will, 106

  Necessity breaks iron, 164

  Necessity is the mother of invention (or teaches arts), 40, 164, 303

  Necessity knows (or has) no law, 40, 111, 164, 335, 393

  Necessity seeks bread where it is to be found, 164

  Necessity teaches the lame to dance, 164

  Necessity unites hearts, 164

  Need makes the old wife trot, 8, 227, 306, 393

  Needle and thread are half clothing, 224

  Neighbour once over the hedge, neighbour over it again, 163

  Neither a dumb barber nor a deaf singer, 286

  Neither a good friar for friend, nor a bad one for enemy, 233

  Neither handsome enough to kill, nor ugly enough to frighten, 230, 286

  Neither reprove nor flatter thy wife, where any one heareth or seeth
  it, 317

  Neither serve one who has been a servant, nor beg of one who has been
  a beggar, 230

  Neither sign a paper without reading it, nor drink water without
  seeing it, 230

  Neither trust or contend, nor lay wagers or lend, and you’ll have
  peace to your end, 285

  Neither women nor linen by candlelight, 111

  Neutrals are soused from above, and singed from below, 139

  Neutrals think to tread on eggs and break none, 163

  Never advise a man to go to the wars, or to marry, 225

  Never ask of him who has, but of him you know wishes you well, 238

  Never challenge a fool to do wrong, 23

  Never did capon love a hen, 27

  Never do evil that good may come of it, 114

  Never fell oak at the very first stroke, 145 (_See_ An oak)

  Never give advice unasked, 166

  Never give the skin when you can pay with the wool, 150

  Never heed the colour of a gift horse, 66

  Never let fools see half-finished work, 388

  Never let the bottom of your purse or of your mind be seen, 113

  Never limp before the lame, 23

  Never put your finger between the tree and the bark, 23

  Never put your thumbs between two grinders, 222

  Never refuse a good offer, 123

  Never repent a good action, 403

  Never say, Fountain, I will not drink of thy water, 23

  Never say, of this water I will not drink, of this bread I will not
  eat, 285

  Never seemed a prison fair, or mistress foul, 24, 157

  Never sell the bearskin till you have killed the bear, 24

  Never speak of a rope in the house of a thief, 276

  Never speak of a rope in the house of one who was hanged, 24, 114,
  153, 221

  Never spread your corn to dry before the door of a saintly man, 200

  Never spur a willing horse, 76

  Never was a mewing eat a good mouser, 113

  Never was hood so holy but the devil could get his head into it, 302

  New brooms sweep clean, 100, 163, 335, 393

  New churches and new taverns are seldom empty, 163

  New come, welcome, 163, 393

  New doctor, new churchyard, 163

  New laws, new roguery, 163

  New loves drive out the old, 199

  New songs are eagerly sung (or are liked the best), 163, 393

  New trappings to an old mule, 199

  Night has no friend, 30

  No and yes cause long disputes, 393

  No answer is also an answer, 381

  No ape but swears he has the handsomest children, 156

  No armour is proof against the gallows, 157

  No better masters than poverty and want, 318

  Nobody so wise but has a little folly to spare, 157

  Nobody sows a thing that will not sell, 209

  Nobody’s sweetheart is ugly, 335

  No comforter’s head ever aches, 72

  No corn without chaff, 318

  No day but has its evening, 26, 115

  No feast like a miser’s, 24

  No fire without smoke, 40

  No flies get into a shut mouth, 9, 104, 221, 276

  No flies light on a boiling pot, 200

  No good doctor ever takes physic, 111

  No good lawyer ever goes to law himself, 111

  No grass grows on a beaten road, 2, 104

  No greater promisers than those who have nothing to give, 319

  No house without a mouse, no barn without corn, no rose without a
  thorn, 157

  No house without its cross, 318

  No is a good answer when given in time, 393

  No jealousy, no love, 163

  No jesting with edged tools, 53

  No Jew a fool, no hare lazy, 230

  No king was ever a traitor, or pope excommunicated, 230

  No living man all things can, 62

  No lock avails against a hatchet, 14

  No mad dog runs seven years, 318

  No man can serve two masters, 164

  No man is a hero in the eyes of his valet, 25

  No man is a prophet in his own country, 40

  No man is so tall that he need never stretch, and none so small that
  he need never stoop, 381

  No man knoweth fortune till he dies, 335

  No man learneth but by pain or shame, 335

  No man limps because another is hurt, 381

  No man looks for another in a sack, unless he has been there himself,
  381

  No man understands knavery better than the abbot who has been a monk,
  20

  No man’s master, no master’s man, 157

  No meat ever remains in the shambles however bad it may be, 114

  No money, no Swiss, 46, 157

  No need to say “trot” to a good horse, 65

  No need to seek shelter for an old ox, 193

  No news is good news, 46, 115

  No office so humble but is better than nothing, 335

  No one betrays himself by silence, 162

  No one can be caught in places he does not visit, 381

  No one can blow and swallow at the same time, 164

  No one can complain of the sea who twice suffers shipwreck, 164

  No one can do nothing, and no one can do everything, 157

  No one can guard against treachery, 172

  No one can have peace longer than his neighbour pleases, 335

  No one can see into another further than his teeth, 388

  No one ever became poor through giving alms, 111

  No one ever repented of having held his tongue, 111

  No one ever saw a goat dead of hunger, 42, 113

  No one falls low unless he attempt to climb high, 381

  No one gets into trouble without his own help, 381

  No one has seen to-morrow, 288

  No one is a good judge in his own cause, 286

  No one is always right, 287

  No one is bound to do impossibilities, 3, 69

  No one is content with his lot, 286

  No one is poor but he who thinks himself so, 285

  No one is rich enough to do without his neighbour, 381

  No one is so liberal as he who has nothing to give, 41

  No one is too old to learn, 191

  No one is wise enough to advise himself, 164

  No one is wise in his own affairs, 335

  No one knows better where the shoe pinches than he who wears it, 111,
  147

  No one knows the parson better than the clerk, 381

  No one knows where another’s shoe pinches, 335

  No one likes justice brought home to his own door, 72

  No one likes to bell the cat, 147

  No one sees his own faults, 164

  No one should take in an eating pawn (or pledge), 119

  No one so hard upon the poor as the pauper who has got into power, 399

  No one so sure but he may miss, 335

  No one will get a bargain he does not ask for, 40

  No one would be an innkeeper but for money, 233

  No pear falls into a shut mouth, 104

  No penny, no pater-noster, 164

  No purchase like a gift, 26

  No relation is poor, 236

  No rose without a thorn, 46, 115, 318

  No sauce like appetite, 26

  No sheep runs into the mouth of a sleeping wolf, 306

  No smoke without fire, 157, 189

  No sooner is the law made than its evasion is discovered, 98

  No tree falls at the first stroke, 156

  No wind can do him good who steers for no port, 41

  No woman is ugly if she is well dressed, 209, 269

  No woman marries an old man for God’s sake, 147

  No wonder if he breaks his head who stumbles twice over one stone, 248

  No wonder lasts more than three days, 111

  No word is ill spoken that is not ill taken, 285

  None so busy as those who do nothing, 25

  None so deaf as he (or those) that won’t hear, 24, 112, 236, 381

  Not all are asleep who have their eyes shut, 115

  Not all flowers are fit for nosegays, 163

  Not all that is true is to be spoken, 286 (_See_ Every truth)

  Not all that shakes (or trembles) falls, 129

  Not all words require an answer, 129

  Not every ball hits, 163

  Not every dog that barks bites, 12

  Not every land has all at hand, 163

  Not every one may pluck roses, 166

  Not every one that dances is glad, 12

  Not every sort of wood is fit to make an arrow, 59

  Not every wood will make wooden shoes, 358

  Not every word requires an answer, 113

  Not he gives who likes, but who has, 230

  Not to wish to recover is a mortal symptom, 256

  Not too little, not too much, 163

  Nothing bolder than the miller’s shirt, that every morning collars a
  thief, 26, 164

  Nothing can come out of a sack but what is in it, 114

  Nothing dries sooner than tears, 164

  Nothing falls into the mouth of a sleeping fox, 2, 196, 267, 299

  Nothing grows old sooner than a kindness, 55

  Nothing happens for nothing, 55

  Nothing in haste but catching fleas, 318

  Nothing is difficult to a willing mind, 67

  Nothing is done while something remains undone, 26

  Nothing is ever well done in a hurry, except flying from the plague
  or from quarrels, and catching fleas, 109

  Nothing is had for nothing, 42

  Nothing is ill said if it is not ill taken, 106

  Nothing is impossible to a willing mind, 5

  Nothing is lost on a journey by stopping to pray or to feed your
  horse, 241

  Nothing is more like an honest man than a rogue, 55

  Nothing is so burdensome as a secret, 55

  Nothing is so liberally given as advice, 55

  Nothing is so new as what has long been forgotten, 164

  Nothing is so new but it has happened before (There is nothing new
  under the sun), 381

  Nothing looks more like a man of sense than a fool who holds his
  tongue, 164

  Nothing passes between asses but kicks, 128

  Nothing should be done in a hurry except catching fleas, 164

  Nothing so bad but it finds its master, 318

  Nothing so good as forbidden fruit, 55

  Nothing venture, nothing have, 50

  Nothing weighs lighter than a promise, 164

  Now that I have an ewe and a lamb, every one says to me: Good morrow,
  Peter, 194

  Nurenberg wit and a skilful hand will find their way through any
  land, 164

  Nurse, you are mistress whilst the child sucks, and after that
  nothing, 198


  O.

  “O what we must suffer for the sake of God’s church!” said the abbot,
  when the roast fowl burned his fingers, 165

  Of bad debtors you may take spoilt herrings, 388

  Of big words and feathers many go to the pound, 151

  Of brothers-in-law and red dogs few are good, 210

  Of evils, choose the least, 211, 276

  Of hasty counsel take good heed, for haste is very rarely speed, 321

  Of judgment every one has a stock on hand for sale, 91

  Of listening children have your fears, for little pitchers have great
  ears, 331

  Of little cloth but a short cloak, 15

  Of oil, wine, and friends, the oldest, 268

  Of other men’s leather large thongs, 212 (_See_ Good thongs)

  Of soup and love, the first is the best, 228, 268

  Of the good man a good pledge, and of the bad neither pledge nor
  surety, 275

  Of the great and of the dead either speak well or say nothing, 90

  Of the malady a man fears, he dies, 211

  Of this world each man has as much as he takes, 92

  Of three things the devil makes a salad: lawyers’ tongues, notaries’
  fingers, and a third that shall be nameless, 92

  Of two cowards, the one who attacks conquers the other, 275

  Of two evils choose the least, 14, 172, 340, 346

  Of two lookers-on one is sure to become a player, 14

  Of what does not concern you say nothing, good or bad, 91

  Of what use is it that the cow gives plenty of milk, if she upsets
  the pail, 175

  Of your wife and your tried friend believe nothing but what you know
  for certain, 213

  Offend one monk, and the lappets of all cowls will flutter as far as
  Rome, 135

  Offer a clown your finger, and he’ll take your fist, 345 (_See_ Give
  a clown)

  Office without pay makes thieves, 134

  Often shooting hits the mark, 165

  Oil is best at the beginning, honey at the end, and wine in the
  middle, 306

  Old as is the boat it may cross the ferry once, 242

  Old birds are hard to pluck, 134

  Old birds are not caught with cats, 336

  Old birds are not caught with chaff, 370

  Old birds are not caught with new nets, 115

  Old churches have dark windows, 133

  Old crows are hard to catch, 133

  Old foxes are hard to catch, 336

  Old friends and new reckonings, 63

  Old friends and old ways ought not to be disdained, 389

  Old love and old brands kindle at all seasons, 63

  Old love does not rust, 134

  Old oxen have stiff horns, 352, 370

  Old oxen tread hard, 134

  Old people see best in the distance, 134

  Old pigs have hard snouts, 134, 370

  Old reckonings breed new disputes, 7, 67, 194

  Old signs do not deceive, 370

  Old thanks are not for new gifts, 68

  Old trees are not to be bent, 133

  Old wounds easily bleed, 134

  On a fool’s beard all learn to shave, 193, 284

  On a fool’s beard the barber learns to shave, 1, 69

  On a hot day muffle yourself the more, 217

  On a long journey even a straw is heavy, 104

  On a small pretence the wolf devours the sheep, 119, 336

  On dry land even brackish water is good, 222

  On poor people’s beards the young barber learns his trade, 134

  Once a thief always a thief, 181, 309

  Once in people’s mouths, ’tis hard to get out of them, 144

  Once is no custom, 61, 314

  Once resolved, the trouble is over, 121

  Once upon a time, no time (or Some day, no day), 144

  One always returns to one’s first love, 43

  One always knocks oneself in the sore place, 43

  One ass among monkeys is grinned at by all, 260

  One ass nicknames another “Long-ears,” 142

  One bad eye spoils the other, 142

  One barber shaves another, 60

  One basket of grapes does not make a vintage, 130

  One beats the bush and another catches the bird, 138, 304

  One bee is better than a thousand (or a handful of) flies, 142, 232

  One beggar likes not that another has two wallets, 353

  One bell serves a parish, 129

  One bird in the dish is better than a hundred in the air, 145 (_See_
  a bird)

  One bird in the hand is worth two flying (or on the roof), 281, 316,
  343 (_See_ A bird)

  One bite brings another, 351

  One blind man leads another into the ditch, 60

  One briar does not make a hedge, 130

  One can speak and seven can sing, 142

  One candle for St. Michael, and another for his devil, 61

  One cannot be and have been, 42

  One cannot be at the oven and the mill at the same time (One cannot
  be in two places at once), 42

  One cannot blow and swallow at the same time, 258

  One cannot drink and whistle at the same time, 114 (_See_ No one)

  One cannot (no man can) keep peace longer than his neighbour will let
  him, 160

  One cannot please everybody and one’s father, 42

  One cannot ring the bells and walk in the procession, 42

  One cannot wash a blackamoor white, 143

  One can’t enter Paradise in spite of the saints, 114

  One can’t hinder the wind from blowing, 42

  One can’t shoe a running horse, 332

  One catches the hare and another eats it, 138

  One crow does not make a winter, 143, 313

  One day is as good as two for him who does everything in its place, 62

  One daughter helps to marry the other, 129

  One deceit brings on another, 61

  One devil does not make hell, 130

  One devil drives out another, 130

  One devil knows another, 130

  One does it for love, another for honour, a third for money, 304

  One does not always hit what one aims at, 59

  One dog growls to see another go into the kitchen, 137

  One door never shuts but another opens, 109, 114

  One enemy is too many (or too much), and a hundred friends are too
  few (or not enough), 98, 130, 142, 364

  One eye of the master sees more than four eyes of his servants, 121

  One eye on the frying-pan and the other on the cat, 260

  One flea does not hinder sleep, 129

  One flower does not make a garland, 61, 130, 142

  One fool always finds a greater to admire him, 63

  One fool is enough in a house, 74

  One fool makes a hundred (or many), 260, 280, 313, 364

  One fool may ask more questions than seven wise men can answer, 144,
  366

  One fool praises another, 144

  One foot is better than two stilts, 39

  One God, one wife, but many friends, 313

  One good morsel and a hundred vexations, 130

  One good turn deserves another, 1, 142, 304

  One good word quenches more heat than a bucket of water, 121

  One grain does not fill the granary, but it helps its companion, 280

  One grievance borne, another follows, 260

  One grows used to love and to fire, 3

  One hair of a maiden’s head pulls harder than ten yoke of oxen, 365

  One hair of a woman draws more than a bell-rope, 143

  One half the world knows not how the other half lives, 29

  One half the world laughs at the other, 30, 143

  One hand full of money is stronger than two hands full of truth, 364

  One hand must wash the other, or both will be dirty, 372

  One hand washes the other, 143

  One hand washes the other, and both the face, 129, 228, 260, 280, 304

  One has always strength enough to bear the misfortunes of one’s
  friends, 41

  One has only to die to be praised, 159

  One hour’s sleep before midnight is better than two (or three) after
  it, 16, 143

  One hunts the hare, and another eats it, 353

  One is never so rich as when one removes (from one house to another),
  43

  One is never soiled but by filth, 43

  One kisses the child for the mother’s sake, and the mother for the
  child’s sake, 159

  One kisses the nurse for the sake of the child, 171

  One knavery is met by another, 260

  One knife keeps another in its sheath, 130

  One knife whets another, 130, 144

  One knows not for whom he gathers, 43

  One learns by failing, 41

  One lie draws ten after it, 129

  One link broken, the whole chain is broken, 136

  One living pope is better than ten dead, 97

  One log does not burn long by itself, 142

  One lost, two found, 316

  One love drives out another, 260

  One man is another’s devil, 144

  One man is born to the money, and another to the purse, 364

  One man is not bad because another is good, 364

  One man knocks in the nail, and another hangs his hat on it, 138

  One man, no man, 62

  One man often talks another off his bench, and seats himself upon it,
  364

  One mangy sheep spoils a whole flock, 365

  One man’s story is no story; hear both sides. (One story is good till
  another is told), 143

  One marriage is never celebrated but another grows out of it, 147

  One may as well be well beaten as badly beaten, 7

  One may buy gold too dear, 43, 126, 159

  One may go a long way after one is tired, 43

  One may have good eyes and see nothing, 127

  One may see through a wall, if there’s a hole in it, 159

  One may steal nothing save a lawyer’s purse, 24

  One may tire of eating tarts, 43

  One misfortune brings on another, 280, 322

  One must be either anvil or hammer, 22

  One must glean at harvest time, 161

  One must howl with the wolves (_See_ He who herds), 22

  One must lose a minnow to catch a salmon, 22

  One must needs like what one cannot hinder, 23

  One must pass through the door or the window, 22

  One must plough with the horses one has, 160

  One must sometimes hold a candle to the devil, 333

  One must step back to make the better leap, 22

  One must talk soothingly to the dog until one has passed him, 58

  One nail drives in another, 304

  One nail drives out another, 61, 84, 130

  One never gets more than the money’s worth of anything, 42

  One never goes so far as when one don’t know whither one is going, 43

  One never wept but another laughed, 113

  One often has need of a lesser than oneself, 41

  One pair of ears would exhaust a hundred tongues, 130

  One penny in the pot (money-box) makes more noise than when it is
  full, 315

  One penny is better on land than ten on the sea, 364

  One piece of good advice is better than a bag full, 364

  One ploughs, another sows, who will reap no one knows, 364

  One quill is better in the hand than seven geese upon the strand, 315

  One raven does not peck out another’s eyes, 353

  One rotten apple in the basket infects the whole quantity, 315

  One rotten egg spoils the whole pudding, 142

  One scabbed sheep will mar (_or_ infect, _or_ spoil) a whole flock,
  24, 36, 129, 347

  One shoe will not fit every foot, 144

  One should be born either a king or a fool, 160

  One starts the game and another bags it, 260

  One starts the hare, another catches it, 130

  One stroke on the nail and a hundred on the horseshoe, 260

  One swallow does not make a spring, 61, 143

  One swallow don’t make a summer, 129, 260, 315, 364

  One sword keeps another in the scabbard, 144, 358

  One “Take this” is better than ten “God help you!”, 144

  One “Take this” is better than two “You-shall-haves!”, 39, 63, 314

  One to-day is better than ten to-morrows, 143

  One to one, and two to the devil, 364

  One trick is met by another, 209

  One voice, no voice, 132

  One wedge drives another, 147 (_See_ One nail)

  One wolf does not kill another, 260, 287

  One word beforehand is better than ten afterwards, 350

  One word brings on another, 129

  One would not be alone even in Paradise, 114

  One would rather be bitten by wolves than by sheep, 388

  One wrong submitted to, another follows, 280

  One’s own hearth is worth gold (The Scotch say: Ane’s ain hearth is
  goud’s worth), 317

  One’s own spurs and another’s horse make the miles short, 127

  One’s prog does not clog (Store is no sore), 226

  Onions, smoke, and a shrew, make a good man’s eyes water, 385

  Only one can be emperor, 164

  Open hand makes open hand, 165

  Open thy mouth that I may know thee, 72

  Open your purse, and I will open my mouth, 263

  Opportunity makes desire, 319

  Opportunity makes the thief, 37, 105, 149, 227, 305, 384

  Order and do it, and you will be rid of anxiety, 230

  Other folks’ cares kill the ass, 210

  Other times, other counsels, 283

  Other times, other folk, 347

  Other times, other manners, 7

  Other towns, other lasses, 134

  Others’ bread has seven crusts, 103

  Others’ bread is too salt, 103

  Our last garment is made without pockets, 109

  Our neighbour’s children are always the worst, 172

  Our time runs on like a stream; first fall the leaves and then the
  tree, 336

  Out before day, in before night, 341

  Out of a great evil often comes a great good, 127

  Out of a little grass comes a great ass, 173

  Out of a white egg often comes a black chick, 93

  Out of sight, out of mind, 37, 134, 245, 280, 339, 384

  Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh, 339

  Out of the frying-pan into the fire, 270

  Out of the mire and into the brook, 255

  Out of yes and no comes all dispute, 15

  “Own kin are the worst friends,” said the fox, when he saw the foxy
  dogs after him, 369

  Ox, keep to your grass, 165


  P.

  Painted flowers have no scent, 49, 319

  Paper and ink and little justice, 239

  Paper bears anything (or is patient), 33, 137

  Paper does not blush, 105

  Paris was not built in a day, 44

  Patience is the virtue of asses, 30

  Patience! said the wolf to the ass, 118

  Patience surpasses learning, 318

  Pay-day comes every day, 190

  Pay what you owe, and be cured of your complaint, 238, 290

  Peace and a well-built house cannot be bought too dearly, 369

  Peace and patience, and death with penitence, 239

  Peace feeds, war wastes; peace breeds, war consumes, 369

  Peace must be bought even at a high price, 369

  Peace with a cudgel in hand is war, 291

  Peacock, look at your legs, 165

  Peel a fig for your friend, a peach for your enemy, 69

  Penny is penny’s brother, 165

  Penny wise and pound foolish, 161

  People count up the faults of those who keep them waiting, 41

  People lend only to the rich, 43

  People make the bells say what they please, 41

  People must eat, even were every tree a gallows, 333, 357 (_See_ A
  man must eat)

  People often change, and seldom for the better, 160

  People take more pains to be damned than to be saved, 41

  Peralvillo justice: hang a man first and try him afterwards, 226

  Perseverance brings success, 296

  Perseverance kills the game, 241, 292

  “Peter, I am taking a ride,” said the goose, when the fox was running
  into the wood with her, 395

  Peter is so godly that God does not improve his condition, 258

  Peter pinches me, and I like it, 240

  Physician, heal thyself, 110, 134

  Piety, prudence, wit, and civility, are the elements of true
  nobility, 148

  Pigs in the cold and men in drink make a great noise, 291

  Pilgrims seldom come home saints, 174

  Pills must be bolted, not chewed, 21, 65

  Places are God’s; placemen are the devil’s, 140

  Plants oft removed never thrive, 165

  Play with an ass and he will whisk his tail in your face, 206, 270

  Play with the fool at home and he will play with you abroad, 206

  Pleasures steal away the mind, 325

  Plenty makes daintiness, 65

  Plenty of words when the cause is lost, 66

  Plough deep and you will have plenty of corn, 202

  Plough or not plough, you must pay your rent, 202

  Plough wet or dry, and you will not have to kiss your neighbour’s
  breech, 202

  Pluck it from among the thistles, and we will take it off your hands,
  255

  Pluck the magpie and don’t make her scream, 119

  Pluck the rose and leave the thorns, 88

  Poison quells poison, 104

  Policy goes beyond strength, 28

  Poor folk’s wisdom goes for little, 300

  Poor men do penance for rich men’s sins, 91

  Poor men’s money and cowards’ weapons are often flourished, 90

  Poor people’s words go many to a sackful, 134

  Poor relations have little honour, 367

  Possession and good right, with lance in hand, 242

  Possession is as good as a title, 46

  Pound the garlic, Pedro, whilst I grate the cheese, 230

  Poverty and hunger have many learned disciples, 134

  Poverty does not destroy virtue, nor does wealth bestow it, 228

  Poverty has no kin, 121

  Poverty is a sort of leprosy, 45

  Poverty is cunning; it catches even a fox, 134

  Poverty is no sin, 45, 200

  Poverty is no sin, but it is a branch of roguery, 240

  Poverty is the reward of idleness, 300

  Poverty is the sixth sense, 134

  Poverty never sped well in love, 291

  Power often goes before talent, 386

  Practice makes perfect, 171, 220, 261

  Practice makes the master, 171

  Practise not your art and ’twill soon depart, 180

  Praise a fine day at night, 168, 365

  Praise a fool, and you may make him useful, 396

  Praise borrowed from ancestors is but sorry praise, 359

  Praise paves the way to friendship, 385

  Praise the sea, and keep on land, 22, 109

  Praise yourself, basket, for I want to sell you, 195

  Praising is not loving, 159

  Pray to the saint until you have passed the slough, 299

  Praying to God, and hitting with the hammer, 194

  Precaution said, Good friend, this counsel keep: strip not yourself
  until you’re laid to sleep, 336

  Precious ointments are put in small boxes, 17

  Precious things are mostly in small compass (In small boxes the best
  spice), 331

  Precipitate counsel—perilous deed, 375

  Prepare a nest for the hen and she will lay eggs for you, 264

  Presents keep friendship warm, 149

  Pretty children sing pretty songs, 367

  Pride went out on horseback and returned on foot, 107

  Pride will have a fall, 152, 375

  Priestly knaves sweat hard at their meat, but never at work get into
  a heat, 165

  Priests and women never forget, 165

  Priests bless themselves first, 165

  Priests even smile pleasantly on young women, 165

  Priests, friars, nuns, and chickens, never have enough, 121

  Priests pay each other no tithes, 165

  Priests should not prate out of the confessional, 165

  Princes have long arms, 105

  Princes have long hands and many ears, 148

  Princes keep good reckoning, they never lose anything, 36

  Princes will not be served on conditions, 36

  Princes use men as the husbandman uses bees, 36

  Prison and Lent were made for the poor, 226

  Proffered service is little valued (Proffered service stinks), 296

  Profit is better than fame, 370

  Promises and undressed cloth are apt to shrink, 384

  Promises don’t fill the belly, 172

  Promises make debts, 191

  Promises make debts, and debts make promises, 300

  Promising and performing are two things, 47, 300

  Promising is one thing, performing another, 172, 300

  Promising is not giving, but serves to content fools, 292

  Prosperity forgets father and mother, 225

  Proverbs are the daughters of daily experience, 338

  Prudent men choose frugal wives, 157

  Public money is like holy water, every one helps himself to it, 101

  Pull gently at a weak rope, 296

  Pulling the devil by the tail does not lead far young or old, 58

  Put a beggar into your barn and he will make himself your heir, 232

  Put not all your eggs into one basket, 333

  Put out the fire betimes, ere it reach the roof, 159

  Put the belfry in the middle of the village, 22

  Put the light out, and all women are alike, 159

  Put your hand in your conscience and see if it don’t come out as
  black as pitch, 338

  Put your hand quickly to your hat, and slowly to your purse, and you
  will take no harm, 380


  Q.

  Quick at meat, quick at work, 153

  Quick and well don’t agree (or seldom go together), 121, 398

  Quick enough, if good enough, 168


  R.

  Rage avails less than courage, 39

  Ragged colts make the handsomest stallions, 135

  Rain comes oft after sunshine, and after a dark cloud a clear sky, 394

  Raise no more devils than you can lay, 160

  Rather a husband with one eye than with one son, 289

  Rather a single grape for me than a brace of figs for thee, 27

  Rather an ass that carries than a horse that throws, 121

  Rather go rob with good men than pray with bad, 266

  Rather hat in hand than hand in purse, 121

  Rather have a little one for your friend, than a great one for your
  enemy, 65

  Rather lose the wool than the sheep, 266

  Rather mulberry than almond (the almond-tree is in blossom earlier
  than the mulberry), 200

  Rather the egg to-day than the hen to-morrow, 349

  Rats do not play tricks with kittens, 209

  Ravens do not peck out ravens’ eyes, 34, 89

  Ready money works great cures, 5

  Reason does not come before years, 172

  Reason lies between bridle and spur, 128

  Reason not with the great, ’tis a perilous gate, 55

  Reasonings banish reason, 36

  Reconciled friendship is a wound ill salved, 70, 368

  “Red is Love’s colour,” said the woer to his foxy charmer, 166

  Rejoice in little, shun what is extreme; the ship rides safest in a
  little stream, 338

  Render unto Cæsar the things that are Cæsar’s, 333

  Renounce the devil and thou shalt wear a shabby cloak, 193

  Rent and taxes never sleep, 191

  Repentance costs dear, 33, 208

  Repentance is the heart’s medicine, 166

  Report makes the wolf bigger than he is, 149

  Repute hangs a man, 31

  Rest comes from unrest, and unrest from rest, 167

  Rest is good after the work is done, 371

  Rest makes rusty, 337

  Revenge a hundred years old has still its milk-teeth, 131

  Revenge converts a little right into a great wrong, 166

  Revenge is new wrong, 165

  Revenge remains not unrevenged, 165

  Reward sweetens labour, 332

  Rich gamblers and old trumpeters are rare, 166

  Rich garments weep on unworthy shoulders, 34

  Rich people are everywhere at home, 166

  Riches and favour go before wisdom and art, 396

  Riches are often abused, but never refused, 396

  Riches breed care, poverty is safe, 396

  Riches cause arrogance; poverty, meekness, 151

  Ride on, but look before you, 337

  Right is with the strongest, 139

  Right or wrong, God aid our purpose, 203

  Right or wrong, ’tis our house up to the roof, 203, 268

  Right overstrained turns to wrong, 212

  Rise early and watch, labour and catch, 230, 280

  Roast geese don’t come flying into the mouth, 305

  Roast pigeons don’t fly through the air, 318

  Rome was not built in a day, 55, 104, 166

  Rosary in hand, the devil at heart, 273

  Roses and maidens soon lose their bloom, 166

  Roses fall, but the thorns remain, 307

  Royal favour, April weather, woman’s love, rose-leaves, dice, and
  card-luck, change every moment, 148

  Running water carries no poison, 67

  Rust consumes iron, and envy consumes itself, 396

  Rust wastes more than use, 31


  S.

  Safe bind, safe find, 174

  Safe over the bridge, one laughs at St. Nepomuck, 150

  Said in sport, meant in earnest, 153

  Said the frying-pan to the kettle, Stand off, black bottom, 213

  Sail while the breeze blows, wind and tide wait for no man, 397

  Saint cannot if God will not, 55

  Saint Francis shaved himself first, and then he shaved his brethren,
  124

  Saint Martin was an easy man, he loved to drink _Cerevisiam_; and
  when he’d no _Pecuniam_, he left in pledge his _Tunicam_, 167

  Saints appear to fools, 266

  Saint’s words, cat’s claws, 291

  Salt and bread make the cheeks red, 167

  Salt spilt is never all gathered, 255, 299

  Samson was a strong man, but he could not pay money before he had it,
  167

  Satiety causes disgust (Abundance begets indifference), 171

  Saving is a greater art than gaining, 169

  Saving is getting, 49

  Savings are the first gain, 109

  Say before they say (Tell your own story first), 200

  Say what we will, do what we will, the boat goes but sorrily without
  oars, 75

  Saying and doing are two things, 98, 167

  Saying is one thing, doing another, 70

  Saying well causes a laugh; doing well produces silence, 8

  Scratch people where they itch, 22

  Scratching and borrowing do well enough, but not for long, 156

  Seat yourself in your place and you will not be made to quit it, 257,
  294

  Second thoughts are best, 103

  Secret fire is discovered by its smoke (Catalan), 222

  Secret gifts are openly rewarded, 374

  Security is nowhere safe, 169

  Security is the first cause of misfortune, 169

  See a pin and let it lie, you’ll want a pin before you die, 54

  See, hear, and hold your tongue, 261

  See how he has risen from a mayor to a hangman, 211

  See Naples and then die, 131

  See that you tie so that you can untie, 233

  Seeing is believing, 79

  Self-done, is soon done (Never trust to another what you should do
  yourself), 168

  Self is the man, 168

  Self-love is bad, and makes the eyes sad, 142

  Self-love is blind, 317

  Self-love nobody else’s love, 344

  Self-praise stinks, friend’s praise hinks, the stranger’s is sincere,
  and may last for a year, 142

  Sell me dear, and measure me fair, 77

  Sell publicly and buy privately, 261

  Send a man of sense on the embassy, and you need not instruct him, 282

  Sense comes with age, 259

  Seven brothers in a council make wrong right, 257

  Seven is company, and nine confusion (Alluding to a dinner party), 257

  Serve a lord and you’ll know what is grief, 257, 294

  Serve as a serf or fly like a deer, 56

  Service is no inheritance, 56, 126

  Services unrequired go unrequited, 171

  Set a beggar on horseback, and he don’t trot, but gallops, 321

  Set a beggar on horseback, and he’ll outride the devil, 178

  Set a peasant on horseback, and he forgets both God and man, 244

  Set a fox to catch a fox, 390

  Set a thief to catch a thief, 167, 334, 364

  Set thy expense according to thy trade, 345

  Set your sail according to the wind, 22

  Shame comes to no man unless he himself help it on the way, 381

  Shame lasts longer than poverty, 337

  She hangs out the broom (wants a husband), 345

  She is fond of greens who kisses the gardener, 223

  She is fond of him—on the side where the pocket hangs, 169

  She is good and honoured who is dead and buried, 222

  She is good who is close to the fire and does not burn, 222

  She is well married who has neither mother-in-law nor sister-in-law,
  201, 267

  She who is born a beauty is born betrothed, 83

  She who loves an ugly man thinks him handsome, 249

  Shear the sheep but don’t flay them, 23, 333

  Shoemaker stick to your last, 168, 262, 337

  Shoemakers are always the worst shod, 34

  Shoemakers go to mass and pray that sheep may die, 261

  Short flax makes long thread, 399

  Short hair is soon brushed, 157

  Short hose must have long points, 193

  Short pleasure often brings long repentance, 399

  Short reckonings make long friends, 34, 157, 273, 317

  Should the heavens fall, many pipkins will be broken, 367

  Show me a liar and I’ll show you a thief, 39, 190, 344

  Show me a poor man, I will show you a flatterer, 273

  Shut your door, and you will make your neighbour good (or a good
  woman), 208, 272

  Sickly body, sickly mind, 157

  Sickness comes in haste, and goes at leisure, 399

  Sickness comes on horseback and departs on foot, 308

  Sickness comes uninvited—no need to bespeak it, 399

  Sickness is every man’s master, 399

  Sight goes before hearsay, 399

  Silence and look out, we shall catch both hen and chicks, 207

  Silence and reflection cause no dejection, 168

  Silence answers much, 345

  Silence gives consent, 50, 86, 185, 247, 311

  Silk and velvet put out the kitchen fire, 167

  Silken tongue and hempen heart often go together, 397

  Silly sheep, where one goes, all go, 238

  Silver and gold are all men’s dears, 398

  Since I wronged you, I have never liked you, 212

  Since the house is on fire, let us warm ourselves, 121, 242

  Since the wine is drawn it must be drunk, 47

  Since we have loaves let us not look for cakes, 242

  Since you have been scolding me, I have counted a hundred and twenty
  holes in that nutmeg grater, 213

  Singed eats live long, 172

  Singers, lovers, and poets, are privileged liars, 167

  Six things have no business in the world: a fighting priest, a coward
  knight, a covetous judge, a stinking barber, a soft-hearted mother,
  and an itchy baker, 57

  Skill or fortune will efface the spots, 72

  Skilled hands eat trouts, 230

  Slander expires at a good woman’s door, 399

  Slander! slander! some of it always sticks, 9

  Slaughter (or kill) no more than you can well salt, 167

  Sleep over it, and you will come to a resolution, 215

  Sloth is the beginning of vice, 332

  Sloth is the key to poverty, 148, 240, 292

  Slow and sure, 158

  Small beer comes the last, 348

  Small gains bring great wealth, 330

  Small profits and often, are better than large profits and seldom,
  157

  Small profits are sweet, 384

  Small rain lays a great wind, 120

  Small saints, too, work miracles, 157

  Small undertakings give great comfort, 177

  Smoke, floods (or stench), and a scolding wife, are enough to drive a
  man out of his life, 19, 224, 337

  Smoke, rain, and a scolding wife, are three bad things in a house, 401

  Smooth words do not flay the tongue, 114

  Snarling curs never want sore ears, 13

  Snivelling folks always want to wipe other folks’ noses, 35

  So begun, so done, 345

  So good that he is good for nothing, 127

  So got, so gone, 345

  So it goes in the world: one has the purse, the other has the gold,
  169

  So many countries, so many customs, 127, 158, 169

  So many heads, so many minds, 127, 397

  So many men, so many minds, 7, 173, 345

  So you tell me there are wolves on the mountain, and foxes in the
  valley, 202

  Soft and fair goeth far, 344

  Soft water constantly striking the hard stone, wears it at last, 264

  Soft words don’t scotch the tongue, 16

  Softly, barber, the water scalds, 120

  Softly, don’t raise a dust, 120

  Soldiers must be well paid, and well hanged, 169

  Some day Peter will command as much as his master, 196

  Some have bread who have no teeth left, 58

  Some have fine eyes and can’t see a jot, 58

  Some have the fame, and others card the wool, 260

  Some sell and don’t deliver, 58

  Some sing who are not merry, 127

  Some think they have done when they are only beginning, 58

  Some thinking to avenge their shame increase it, 58

  Some who jest tell tales of themselves, 127

  Some who mean only to warm, burn themselves, 58

  Something to every one is good division, 155

  Sometimes an egg is given for an ox, 69

  Sometimes the lees are better than the wine, 69

  Soon enough if well enough, 5

  Soon fire, soon ashes, 341

  Soon gained, soon squandered, 58

  Soon grass, soon hay, 341

  Soon ripe, soon rotten, 154

  Soon ripe, soon rotten; soon wise, soon foolish, 341

  Sooner or later the truth comes to light, 341

  Sorrow seldom comes alone, 397

  Sour wine, old bacon, and rye bread, keep a house rich, 261

  Sow corn in clay, and plant vines in sand, 257

  Sow not money on the sea, lest it sink, 344

  Spare to speak and spare to speed, 51

  Sparrows should not dance with cranes, their legs are too short, 375

  Speak little and well, they will think you somebody, 277

  Speak little of your ill luck, and boast not of your good luck, 400

  Speak little, speak truth. Spend little, pay cash, 166

  Speak not ill of the year until it is past, 112, 235, 285

  Speak, that I may see thee, 166

  Speak well of your friend; of your enemy neither well nor ill, 91

  Speaking comes by nature, silence by understanding, 166

  Speaking is silver, silence is gold, 338

  Speaking silence is better than senseless speech, 350

  Speech is oft repented, silence seldom, 386

  Speedy rise, speedy fall (Sudden glory soon goes out), 168

  Spending your money with many a guest, empties the kitchen, the
  cellar, and chest, 190

  Spilt salt is never well collected, 255, 299

  Spinner, spin softly, you disturb me; I am praying, 278

  Spit not in the well, you may have to drink its water, 40

  Spur not a willing horse, 1, 77, 188

  Stagnant water grows stinking, 170

  Stand up, farthing, let the florin sit down (Stand up, cent, let the
  dollar sit down), 152

  Starlings are lean because they go in flocks, 100

  Starved lice bite the hardest, 332

  Stay a while, and lose a mile, 338

  Stealing would be a nice thing, if thieves were hanged by the girdle,
  218

  Step by step one goes far (or to Rome), 118, 297, 341

  Still water breeds vermin, 67

  Still waters run deep, 170, 338, 363

  Stock-fish are made tender by much beating, 334

  Stolen bread stirs the appetite, 44

  Stones or bread, one must have something in hand for the dogs, 118

  Stoop, and let it pass; the storm will have its way, 364

  Store is no sore, 1, 174

  Strain not your bow beyond its bent, lest it break, 338

  Strangers’ meat is the greatest treat, 369

  Straying shepherd, straying sheep, 154

  Strength avails not a coward, 67

  Stretch your legs, according to your coverlet, 160 170, 338 (_See_
  Every one stretches)

  Strew no roses before swine, 338

  Strike while the iron is hot, 22, 74, 160, 282, 337, 390

  Strong folks have strong maladies, 170

  Strong is the vinegar of sweet wine, 99

  “Success to you! God speed the craft!” as the hangman said to the
  judge, 150

  Such awkward things will happen as going into the great square and
  coming back without ears, 202

  Suffering and patience, obedience and application, help the lowly
  born to honour, 384

  Sufficient for the day is the evil thereof, 2

  Sugared words generally prove bitter, 239

  Suit yourself to the times, 167

  Summer-sown corn and women’s advice turn out well once in every seven
  years, 169

  Supper is soon served in a plentiful house, 284

  Supple as a glove, 318

  Suspicion is the poison of friendship, 57

  Sweat makes good mortar, 168

  Sweep before your own door before you look after your neighbour’s, 340

  Sweet meat requires sour sauce, 93

  Sweet song has betrayed many, 170

  Sweet wine makes sour vinegar, 170

  Swim on and don’t trust, 40


  T.

  Take a horse by his bridle and a man by his word, 333

  Take a woman’s first advice and not her second, 46

  Take advice of a red-bearded man, and be gone, 400

  Take an ox by his horn, a man by his word, 31

  Take care of your geese when the fox preaches, 400

  Take care of your plough, and your plough will take care of you, 180

  Take care you don’t let your tail be caught in the door, 100

  Take counsel before it goes ill, lest it go worse, 312

  Take down a thief from the gallows and he will hang you up, 15, 92

  Take help of many, advice of few, 400

  Take not your sickle to another man’s corn, 388

  Take nothing in hand that may bring repentance, 335

  Take the horse to the knacker, and throw in bridle and saddle, 190

  Take the middle of the way and thou wilt not fall, 225

  Take the world as it is, not as it ought to be, 164

  Taking out without putting in soon comes to the bottom, 211, 276

  Talk as you go, husband, to the gallows, 199

  Talk little and well, and you will be looked upon as somebody, 223

  Talk of sporting, and buy game in the market, 223

  Talk of the devil and his imp appears, 178

  Talk of the devil and you hear his bones rattle, 299

  Talk of the wolf and behold his skin, 277

  Talk of the wolf and his tail appears, 48, 299

  Talking is easier than doing, and promising than performing, 166

  Talking is silver, silence is gold, 166

  Tall trees catch much wind, 328

  Tell a lie and you’ll hear the truth, 167, 214

  Tell everybody your business and the devil will do it for you, 92

  Tell her she is handsome, and you will turn her head (or brain), 214,
  275

  Tell it her once, and the devil will tell it her ten times, 214

  Tell, me the company you keep, and I’ll tell you what (or who) you
  are, 16, 92, 214, 344

  Tell me with whom thou goest, and I’ll tell thee what thou doest, 275

  Tell no one what you would have known only to yourself, 303

  Tell no tales out of school, 160

  Tell not all you, know believe not all you hear, do not all you are
  able, 67

  Tell not all you know, nor judge of all you see, if you would live in
  peace, 245

  Tell your affairs in the market-place, and one will call them black
  and another white, 255

  Tell your friend a lie, and if he keeps it secret tell him the truth,
  203, 268

  Tell your friend your secret, and he will set his foot on your neck,
  91, 213, 275

  Ten noes are better than one lie, 401

  Tender surgeons make foul wounds, 344

  Thank you, pretty pussy, was the death of my cat, 119

  That beer’s of your own brewing, and you must drink it, 303

  That bench is well adorned that is filled with virtuous women, 352

  That brings water to the mill, 9

  That costs dear which is bought with begging, 77

  That happens in a moment (or a day) which may not happen in a hundred
  years, 20, 66

  That is beggar’s fare, said the dame, when she fried eggs with the
  sausages, 303

  That is done soon enough which is well done, 5, 73

  That is gold which is worth gold, 43, 118, 238, 290

  That is good wisdom which is wisdom in the end, 324

  That is not in the looking-glass which is seen in the looking-glass,
  147

  That is pleasant to remember which was hard to endure, 124

  That is poor help that helps you from the feather-bed to the straw,
  359

  That may be soon done which brings long repentance, 362

  That miller is honest who has hair on his teeth, 139

  That mouse will have a tail (_i. e._ The thing will have a long train
  of consequences), 303

  That priest is a fool who decries his relics, 119

  That usury is a sin some hold, but take for granted they’ve no gold,
  185

  That which burns thee not, cool not, 343

  That which comes with sin, goes with sorrow, 375

  That which covers thee discovers thee, 252

  That which has been eaten out of the pot cannot be put into the dish,
  362

  That which has been thrown away has often to be begged for again, 393

  That which is customary requires no excuse, 88

  That which is stamped a penny will never be a pound, 352

  That which is unsaid, may be said; that which is said, cannot be
  unsaid, 363

  That which must be, will be, 362

  That’s all well and good, but gold is better, 303

  That’s as much as a bean in a brewing copper, 325

  That’s but an empty purse which is full of other men’s money, 354

  That’s quickly done which is long repented, 324

  Thaw reveals what has been hidden by snow, 362

  The abbey does not fail for want of one monk, 46

  The absent are always in the wrong, 33, 303

  The absent were never in the right, 237

  The accomplice is as bad as the thief, 294

  The account is correct, but not a sixpence appears, 224

  The act of treachery is liked, but not he that does it, 228

  The aged in council—the young in action, 352

  The ant gets wings that she may perish the sooner, 233 (_See_ God
  gives wings)

  The anvil is not afraid of the hammer, 138, 365

  The anvil is used to noise, 138

  The anvil lasts longer than the hammer, 95, 120

  The archer that shoots badly has a lie ready, 261, 269

  The arguments of the strongest have always the most weight, 31

  The arms of Bruges: an ass in an arm-chair, 325

  The art is not in making money, but in keeping it, 323

  The ass and his driver do not think alike, 138, 304

  The ass carries corn to the mill and gets thistles, 138

  The ass dead, the barley at his tail, 195, 267

  The ass does not know the worth of his tail till he has lost it, 107

  The ass embraced the thistle, and they found themselves relations, 263

  The ass of many owners is eaten by wolves, 202, 267

  The ass that is common property is always the worst saddled, 30

  The ass that is hungry eats thistles, 268

  The ass that trespasses on a stranger’s premises will leave them
  laden with wood (_i.e._ cudgelled), 268

  The ass well knows in whose house he brays, 205, 269

  The ass’s hide is used to the stick, 107

  The ass’s son brays one hour daily, 288

  The back door is the one that robs the house, 107

  The bacon of paradise for the married man that does not repent, 220

  The bad barber leaves neither hair nor skin, 220

  The bad man always suspects knavery, 218

  The bad neighbour gives a needle without thread (Galician), 198, 265

  The bagpipe never utters a word till its belly is full, 27

  The bailiff’s cow and another’s cow are two different cows, 140

  The balance in doing its office knows neither gold nor lead, 18

  The bath has sworn not to whiten the blackamoor, 225

  The beadle’s cow may graze in the churchyard, 157, 331

  The beadle of the parish is always of the vicar’s opinion, 31

  The beard does not make the philosopher, 105

  The beast dead, the venom dead, 39, 110

  The beast that goes well is never without some one to try his paces,
  225, 263

  The beaten pay the fine, 33

  The beggar’s wallet has no bottom, 103, 136

  The beginning hot, the middle lukewarm, the end cold, 134

  The bell does not go to mass, and yet calls every one to it, 112, 235

  The belly does not accept bail, 263

  The belly gives no credit, 351

  The belly is a bad adviser, 138

  The belly overrules the head, 36

  The belly warm, the foot at rest, 268

  The benefice must be taken with its liabilities, 22

  The best always goes first, 125

  The best cast at dice is not to play, 218

  The best cause requires a good pleader, 303

  The best cloth has uneven threads, 221

  The best company must part, as King Dagobert said to his hounds, 26

  The best driver will sometimes upset, 25

  The best feed of a horse is his master’s eye, 218, 303

  The best friends are in one’s purse, 140

  The best goods are the cheapest, 321

  The best horse stumbles sometimes, 321 (_See_ Even a horse)

  The best is the cheapest, 102, 137

  The best is what one has in his hand, 137

  The best manure is under the farmer’s shoe, 357

  The best of the mill is that the sacks can’t speak, 154

  The best pears fall into the pigs’ mouths, 76

  The best pilots are ashore, 303

  The best spices are in small bags, 111 (_See_ Precious ointments)

  The best swimmer is the first to drown himself, 85

  The best trees are the most beaten, 104

  The best wine has its lees, 32

  The better day the better deed, 8, 221, 276

  The better lawyer, the worse Christian, 328

  The big fish eat the little ones, 34, 103

  The bird once out of hand is hard to recover, 367

  The bird ought not to soil its own nest, 37

  The biter is sometimes bit, 57, 78

  The bites of priests and wolves are hard to heal, 176

  The blade wears out the sheath, 29

  The blind man has picked up a coin, 264

  The blunders of physicians are covered by the earth, 290

  The boor looks after a cent as the devil after a soul, 303

  The bow may be bent until it breaks, 396

  The bow must not be always bent, 303

  The bow that is always bent slackens or breaks, 202

  The bowels support the heart, and not the heart the bowels, 260

  The branch is seldom better than the stem, 397

  The branch must be bent early that is to make a good crook, 363

  The braying of an ass does not reach heaven, 124

  The bread eaten, the company departed, 219, 291

  The bucket goes so often to the well that it leaves its handle there,
  128

  The buckets take to fighting with the well, and get their heads
  broken, 109

  The bud becomes a rose, and the rose a hip, 31

  The busy fly is in every man’s dish, 219

  The candle that goes before gives the best light, 305

  The candle that goes before is better than that which comes after, 28

  The cask always smells of the herring, 28

  The cask can give no other wine than what it contains, 105

  The cask full, the mother-in-law drunk, 226

  The cask smells of the wine it contains, 226

  The cat always leaves her mark upon her friend, 203

  The cat is a good friend, but scratches, 206, 269

  The cat loves fish, but is loth to wet her feet, 106, 141

  The cat well knows whose beard she licks, 269

  The cats that drive away mice are as good as those that catch them,
  147

  The chamber-bell (chamber-clapper, or curtain lecture) is the worst
  sound a man can have in his ears, 101

  The chamois climbs high and yet is caught, 149

  The child who gets a stepmother also gets a stepfather, 357

  The church, the sea, or the royal household, for those who would
  thrive, 225

  The churl knows not the worth of spurs, 36

  The coalheaver is master at home, 13

  The cock is a lord (_or_ king, _or_ valiant) on his own dunghill, 95,
  134, 138

  The cock often crows without a victory, 400

  The cook shuts his eyes when he crows, because he knows it by heart,
  138

  The concealer is as bad as the thief, 152

  The corn falls out of a shaken sheaf, 15

  The corn that is taken to a bad mill will be badly ground, 362

  The counterfeit image of a pot with two ears, 305

  The court of Rome likes not sheep without wool, 89

  The cow does not know the value of her tail till she has lost it,
  305, 383

  The cow gives milk through her mouth, 141

  The cow is milked, not the ox; the sheep is shorn, not the horse, 383

  The cow licks no strange calf, 141

  The cow that does not eat with the oxen, either eats before or after
  them (Galician), 204

  The cows that low most give the least milk, 141

  The cross on his breast, and the devil in his acts, 226

  The crow will find its mate (Like will to like), 383

  The curse on the hearth wounds the deepest, 347

  The danger past, the saint cheated, 118

  The day I did not make my toilette, there came to my house one I did
  not expect, 217

  The day I did not sweep the house, there came to it one I did not
  expect, 217

  The day is never so holy that the pot refuses to boil, 352

  The day is sure to come when the cow will want her tail, 352

  The day you marry ’tis either kill or cure, 217

  The days follow each other and are not alike, 35

  The dead and the absent have no friends, 199, 265

  The dead are soon forgotten, 35

  The dead open the eyes of the living, 290

  The dearer the child, the sharper must be the rod, 382

  The debts go to the next heir, 141

  The deceived sheep that went for wool and came back shorn, 216

  The devil gets into the belfry by the vicar’s skirts, 241

  The devil has his martyrs among men, 304

  The devil is bad because he is old, 102

  The devil is civil when he is flattered, 139

  The devil is fond of his own (Galician), 238

  The devil is not always at a poor man’s door, 32

  The devil is not so black (or ugly) as he is painted, 102, 139, 285,
  304

  The devil is so fond of his son that he put out his eye, 258

  The devil leads him by the nose, who the dice too often throws, 10

  The devil likes to souse what is already wet, 139

  The devil lurks (or sits) behind the cross, 15, 152, 213, 304

  The devil may die without my inheriting his horns, 32

  The devil tempts all, but the idle man tempts the devil, 102

  The devil turns away from a closed door, 69, 212

  The devil was handsome when he was young, 32

  The devil will tempt Lucifer, 102

  The devil’s in the cards, said Sam, four aces and not a single trump,
  302

  The devil’s meal turns half to bran, 28

  The difficult thing is to get foot in the stirrup, 103

  The doctor is often more to be feared than the disease, 32

  The doctor seldom takes physio, 92

  The dog barks and the ox feeds, 76

  The dog does not get bread every time he wags his tail, 159

  The dog gets into the mill under cover of the ass, 57

  The dog rages at the stone, not at him who throws it, 138

  The dog that barks much, bites little, 272 (_See_ Dogs that bark)

  The dog that barks much is never good for hunting, 271

  The dog that bites does not bark in vain, 76

  The dog that has been beaten with a stick is afraid of its shadow, 101

  The dog that has its bitch in town never barks well, 208

  The dog that is forced into the woods will not hunt many deer, 354

  The dog that is quarrelsome and not strong, woe to his hide, 77

  The dog that kills wolves, is killed by wolves, 240, 271

  The dog that licks ashes is not to be trusted with flour, 65

  The dog that means to bite don’t bark, 101

  The dog that starts the hare is as good as the one that catches it,
  138

  The dog wags his tail, not for you but your bread, 110, 232, 269

  The dog will not get free by biting his chain, 379

  The dogs bite the hindermost, 137

  The dog’s kennel is not the place to keep a sausage, 380

  The dress does not make the friar, 217

  The drunken man’s joy is often the sober man’s sorrow, 363

  The drunken mouth reveals the heart’s secrets, 171

  The eagle does not catch (or hunt) flies, 29, 138 (_See_ Eagles)

  The eagle does not war against frogs, 107

  The early riser is healthy, cheerful, and industrious, 20

  The earth covers the errors of the physician, 99

  The earth hides, as it takes, the physician’s mistakes, 230

  The earth is always frozen to lazy swine, 382

  The earthen pan gains nothing by contact with the copper pot, 384

  The egg will be more knowing than the hen, 137

  The election of the abbot is not stopped for want of a monk, 119

  The elephant does not feel a flea-bite, 108

  The Emperor of Germany is the king of kings, the King of Spain king
  of men, the King of France king of asses, the King of England king of
  devils, 33

  The empty waggon must make room for the full one, 139

  The end crowns the work, 29, 102, 288, 322

  The end of all things is death, 322

  The end of mirth is the beginning of sorrow, 322

  The end of the corsair is to drown, 102

  The end of wrath is the beginning of repentance, 191

  The envious man’s face grows sharp and his eyes big, 196, 266

  The envious will die, but envy never, 34

  The evil which issues from thy mouth falls into thy bosom, 218

  The executioner is a keen shaver, 138

  The eye is bigger than the belly, 140

  The eye is blind if the mind is absent, 88

  The eye is never satiated with seeing, 136

  The eye of the master fattens the steed, 37, 109, 219, 380

  The eye of the master makes the horse fat, and that of the mistress
  the chambers neat, 325

  The eyes are bigger than the belly, 306

  The eyes believe themselves, the ears other people, 140

  The fairer the hostess, the heavier the reckoning, 155

  The false friend is like the shadow of a sun-dial, 32

  The farther from Rome the nearer to God, 328

  The farthest way about is the nearest way home, 143

  The fat sow knows not what the hungry sow suffers, 353

  The father a saint, the son a sinner (or devil), 92, 212, 275

  The fatter the flea the leaner the dog, 154

  The fault is as great as he that commits it, 28, 258

  The fear of war is worse than war itself, 119

  The feast passes and the fool remains, 118, 239

  The fertile field becomes sterile without rest, 216

  The fewer the words the better the prayer, 155

  The fierce ox becomes tame on strange ground, 216

  The fingers of the same hand are not alike, 290

  The fire burns brightest on one’s own hearth, 351

  The fire heeds little whose cloak it burns, 380

  The fire is welcome within when icicles hang without, 351

  The fire well knows whose cloak burns, 205

  The first at the mill grinds first, 85

  The first bird gets the first grain, 353

  The first blow is as good as two, 33, 103

  The first comer grinds first (First come, first served), 33

  The first dish pleases every one, 107

  The first in the boat has the choice of oars, 317

  The first occasion offered quickly take, lest thou repine at what
  thou didst forsake, 320

  The first step binds one to the second, 33

  The first step is all the difficulty, 26 (_See_ The difficult thing)

  The first wife is a broom, and the second a lady, 228

  The fish lead a pleasant life, they drink when they like, 140

  The fisherman fishes in troubled water, 284

  The flame is not far from the smoke, 385

  The flatterer’s throat is an open sepulchre, 100

  The flawed pot lasts longest, 36

  The flitch hangs never so high but a dog will look out for the bone,
  368

  The fly flutters about the candle till at last it gets burnt, 306

  The fly that bites the tortoise breaks its beak, 106

  The fool cuts himself with his own knife, 32

  The fool hunts for misfortune, 32

  The fool knows more in his own house than the sage in other men’s, 120

  The fool who is silent passes for wise, 19, 289

  The foot of the farmer manures the field, 351

  The forest has ears, and the field has eyes, 398

  The fortress that parleys soon surrenders, 77

  The fox advised the others to cut off their tails, because he had
  left his own in the trap, 107

  The fox changes his skin, but keeps the rogue, 138

  The fox does not do as much mischief in a year as it pays for in an
  hour, 235

  The fox does not go twice into the same trap, 395

  The fox does not prey near his hole, 188

  The fox goes through the corn and does not eat, but brushes it down
  with his tail (Galician), 204

  The fox is knowing, but more knowing he who catches him, 233, 284

  The fox knows well with whom he plays tricks, 205

  The fox may lose his hair, but not his cunning, 316

  The fox said the grapes were sour, 107

  The fox says of the mulberries when he cannot get at them, they are
  good for nothing, 2

  The fox that sleeps in the morning has not his tongue feathered, 55

  The fox that tarries long is on the watch for prey, 254

  The fox thinks everybody eats poultry like himself, 20

  The Frenchman sings well when his throat is moistened, 269

  The friar (or monk) who begs for God begs for two, 222

  The friendship of great men is like the shadow of a bush, soon gone, 4

  The friendship of the great is fraternity with lions, 70

  The frog does not bite, because it cannot, 107

  The frog will jump back into the pool, although it sits on a golden
  stool, 307

  The fruit falls not far from the stem, 307

  The fugitive finds everything impede him, 66

  The full belly does not believe in hunger, 89

  The full cask makes no noise, 105 (_See_ Full vessels)

  The full-fed cow makes company of her tail, 228

  The full-fed sheep is frightened at her own tail, 238, 290

  The fuller the cask, the duller its sound, 155

  The gallows takes its own, 226

  The gallows was made for the unlucky, 106, 239

  The game is not worth the candle, 32

  The gardener’s dog neither eats greens (or lettuce) nor lets any one
  else eat them, 76, 219, 290

  The gardener’s dog, neither full nor hungry, 219

  The gardener’s feet do no harm to the garden, 230

  The generous man enriches himself by giving, the miser hoards himself
  poor, 310, 354

  The gentle calf sucks all the cows, 269

  The gentle hawk mans herself, 41

  The gentle lamb sucks any ewe as well as its mother, the surly lamb
  sucks neither its own nor another, 216

  The Germans carry their wit in their fingers, 33

  The girl as she is taught, the flax as it is wrought, 227

  The glass-dealer’s horses fell out, and he looked on to see which
  kicked hardest, 254

  The goat can’t well cover herself with her tail, 230

  The golden ass passes everywhere, 202

  The golden key opens every door, 88, 105

  The good seaman is known in bad weather, 101

  The good shepherd shears, not flays, 101

  The good time comes but once, 103

  The goose goes so often into the kitchen, till at last she sticks to
  the spit, 369

  The goose hisses, but does not bite, 305

  The goose that has a good gander cackles loudly, 353

  The goose that has lost its head no longer cackles, 353

  The goslings would lead the geese out to grass, 35

  The gossips fall out and tell each other truths, 254

  The gown does not make the friar (or monk), 36, 105

  The grapes are sour, said the fox when he could not reach them, 202,
  304 (_See_ The fox said)

  The greater the fear, the nearer the danger, 382

  The greatest burdens are not the gainfullest, 17

  The greatest conqueror is he who conquers himself, 185

  The greatest cunning is to have none at all, 30

  The greatest step is out of doors, 138

  The green burns for the dry, and the righteous pay for sinners, 202

  The greyhound that starts many hares kills none, 223, 278

  The guests will go away, and we will eat the pasty, 279

  The gutter by dropping wears the stone, 226

  The handsomest snuffs the candle, 141

  The handsomest woman can only give what she has, 30

  The hardest step is over the threshold, 103

  The hare always returns to her form, 32

  The hare starts from where it is least expected, 91, 214, 241

  The hasty man was never a traitor, 152

  The headache is mine, and the cows are ours, 264

  The heart does not lie, 322

  The heart does not think all the mouth says, 113

  The heart is no traitor, 216

  The heart leads whither it goes, 32

  The hen flies not far unless the cock flies with her, 399

  The hen is ill off when the egg teaches her how to cackle, 360

  The hen lays upon an egg, 258

  The hen likes to lay in a nest where there are eggs already, 137

  The hen lives by pickings, as the lion by prey, 396

  The hen ought not to cackle in presence of the cock, 30

  The hen that stays at home picks up the crumbs, 278

  The hen’s eyes are with her chickens, 30

  The hen’s eyes follow her eggs (Galician), 204, 289

  The herb patience does not grow in every man’s garden, 400

  The heron blames the water because he cannot swim, 374

  The higher the ape climbs the more he shows his rump, 45, 154

  The higher the bell is hung, the shriller it sounds, 154

  The higher the mountain the lower the vale, the taller the tree the
  harder the fall, 328

  The higher the rise the greater the fall, 15, 69, 211

  The hole invites the thief, 215

  The honest man enjoys the theft, 216

  The horse is not judged of by the saddle, 137

  The horse must go to the manger, and not the manger to the horse, 374

  The horse that draws best is the most whipped, 43, 137

  The horse thinks one thing, and his rider another, 260

  The horse’s best allowance is his master’s eye, 280 (_See_ The eye of
  the master)

  The horseshoe that clatters wants a nail, 224

  The house completed, possession defeated, 77

  The hunchback does not see his own hump, but sees his companion’s,
  31, 216

  The husband’s mother is the wife’s devil, 140

  The ill year comes in swimming, 32

  The injurer never forgives, 84

  The interested friend is a swallow on the roof (Prepared to leave at
  the approach of winter), 29

  The Italianised Englishman is a devil incarnate, 109

  The Italians are wise before the act, the Germans in the act, the
  French after the act, 99

  The Italians cry, the Germans bawl, and the French sing, 35

  The Jew ruins himself with passovers, the Moor with wedding feasts,
  and the Christian with lawsuits, 218

  The kettle smuts the frying-pan, 31

  The key at the girdle keeps me good and my neighbour too, 264

  The key that is used grows bright, 139

  The keys at the girdle, the dog in the larder, 228

  The king cannot always rule as he wishes, 139

  The king goes as far as he can, not so far as he would, 220

  The king likes the treachery, but not the traitor, 239

  The king of the bees has no sting, 290

  The king’s chaff is better than other folk’s corn, 140

  The kite’s malady, its wings broken and its beak sound, 218

  The laggard cow gets the sour grass, 355

  The lame goat does not take a siesta, 270

  The land a man knows is his mother, 228

  The last come is the best liked, 32

  The last comers are often the masters, 34

  The last shuts the door, 87, 139

  The last stole the sack, 139

  The late comer is ill lodged, 86

  The later the evening the fairer the company, 155

  The law devised, its evasion contrived, 278

  The law says what the king pleases, 29

  The lawyer’s pouch is a mouth of hell, 29

  The lazy pig does not eat ripe pears, 121

  The lazy servant takes eight steps to avoid one, 219, 289

  The lean dog is all fleas, 197

  The less said the sooner mended, 343

  The letter enters with blood, 226

  The liar is not believed when he speaks the truth, 69

  The liar is sooner caught than the cripple, 200

  The light is painful to sore eyes, 68

  The lion had need of the mouse, 102

  The lion is known by his claws, 90

  The lion is not so fierce as he is painted, 235

  The list is worse than the cloth, 29

  The listener makes the backbiter, 32

  The little alms are the good alms, 30

  The lives of doctors, the souls of priests, and the property of
  lawyers, are in great danger, 107

  The longest way round is the shortest way home, 107

  The Lord will not fail to come, though he may not come on horseback,
  403

  The loss which your neighbour does not know is no real loss, 267

  The loyal man lives no longer than the traitor pleases, 237

  The lucky man has a daughter for his first-born, 196, 264

  The mad dog bites its master, 289

  The magistrate’s son gets out of every scrape, 224

  The magpie cannot leave her hopping, 304

  The malady that is most incurable is folly, 289

  The man has neither sense nor reason who leaves a young wife at home,
  37

  The man in the moon stole the wood, 139

  The man of sense does not hang up his knowledge, 290

  The man of your own trade is your enemy, 279

  The mare’s kick does not harm the colt, 76, 226, 288

  The mare’s kicks are caresses to the horse, 208, 273

  The master derives honour from his art, 368

  The master orders the man, the man orders the cat, and the cat orders
  her tail, 282

  The master’s eye and foot are the best manure for the field, 303

  The master’s eye does more than both his hands, 136

  The master’s eye makes the horse fat, 289 (_See_ The eye of the
  master)

  The master’s foot is manure for the estate, 219

  The maw costs much, 305

  The meaning is best known to the speaker, 33

  The merchant that loses cannot laugh, 38

  The middle path is the safe path, 162

  The mill does not grind with water that is past (or without water),
  33, 102, 209, 272

  The mill gains by going, and not by standing still, 199

  The miller is never so drunk that he forgets to take his dues, 390

  The miller’s hen and widower’s maid, of want need never be afraid, 162

  The millstone that lies undermost also helps to grind, 354

  The miser and the pig are of no use till dead, 31

  The miser’s bag is never full, 370

  The money paid, the workman’s arm is broken, 5

  The monk preached against stealing, and had the goose in his larder
  (The friar preached against stealing, and had a pudding in his
  sleeve), 306

  The monk responds as the abbot chants, 32, 139

  The monk (or friar) that begs for God’s sake begs for two, 39, 222

  The month loses its own, but not the year, 240

  The moon does not heed the baying of dogs, 106

  The more a man exposes his nakedness the colder he is, 46

  The more a woman admires her face, the more she ruins her house, 227

  The more by law, the less by right, 382

  The more cooks the worse broth, 382

  The more fools the more laughter, 46

  The more haste, the less (or worse) speed, 46, 154, 250, 328

  The more knave, the better luck, 382

  The more law, the less justice, 155

  The more one has the more one wants, 250

  The more servants the worse service, 328

  The more shepherds the less care, 382

  The more the fox is cursed, the more prey he catches, 123

  The more the well is used the more water it yields, 155

  The more you court a clown the statelier he grows, 261

  The more you stir a t—d (_or_ filth, _or_ mire) the more it stinks,
  46, 155, 328, 357

  The more you stroke the cat’s back the more she sets up her tail, 123

  The morning hour has gold in its mouth, 162, 306, 390

  The mortar always smells of the garlic, 32, 103

  The most cautious passes for the most chaste, 227

  The most covered fire is always the most glowing, 32

  The most cunning are the first caught, 36

  The most difficult mountain to cross is the threshold, 362 (_See_ The
  hardest step)

  The most disorderly students make the most pious preachers, 140

  The most friendly fortune trips up your heels, 29

  The most learned are not the wisest, 305

  The most prudent yields to the strongest, 70

  The moth does most mischief to the finest garment, 111

  The Mother of God appears to fools, 197

  The mother reckons well, but the child reckons better, 205

  The mother-in-law does not remember that she was once a
  daughter-in-law, 237, 285

  The mother-in-law must be entreated, and the pot must be let stand,
  228

  The mountain is in labour, and brings forth a mouse, 118

  The mountaineer’s ass carries wine and drinks water, 30

  The mouse does not leave the cat’s house with a bellyful, 91, 210

  The mouse is knowing, but the cat more knowing, 390

  The mouse may find a hole, be the room ever so full of cats, 394

  The mouse that has but one hole is soon caught, 57, 219, 315

  The mouth and the purse, shut, 225

  The month often utters what the head must answer for, 390

  The mouth that says yes, says no, 205, 269

  The mule long keeps a kick in reserve for its master, 33

  The myrtle is always a myrtle, though it be among nettles, 102

  The nearer the bone the sweeter the flesh, 155, 328

  The nearer the church the farther from God, 46, 155

  The nearer the inn, the longer the road, 155

  The nearer the minster the later to mass, 46

  The nearest boor is the nearest kinsman when the calf lies in the
  ditch, 334

  The nearest the dearest, 137

  The nest made, the bird dead, 287

  The new is always liked, though the old is often better, 393

  The niggard spends as much as he who is liberal, and in the end more,
  7

  The night brings counsel, 30

  The nobler the blood the less the pride, 382

  The nobler the tree the more pliant the twig, 328

  The noise is so great one cannot hear God thunder, 31

  The oaths of one who loves a woman are not to be believed, 225

  The office teaches the man, 136

  The official who can’t lie may as well be out of the world, 219

  The oft-moved (or rolling) stone gathers no moss, 356

  The old branch breaks if bent, 370

  The old for want of ability, and the young for want of knowledge, let
  things be lost, 220

  The old man at home, and the young abroad, lie after the same
  fashion, 220

  The old monkey gets the apple, 30

  The old ones sing, the young ones pipe (or, As the old cock crows,
  the young cook learns), 342

  The old saints are forgotten in the new, 291

  The old wife, if she does not serve for a pot, serves for a cover, 227

  The older a fool the worse he is (There is no fool like an old fool),
  154

  The older one grows the more one learns, 328

  The older, the colder; the more avaricious, the more vicious, 154

  The one-eyed is a king in the land of the blind, 6, 172, 222, 286

  The only victory over love is flight, 31

  The only way to keep a secret is to say nothing, 25

  The open door invites the thief, 306 (_See_ The hole; _also_
  Opportunity)

  The owl does not praise the light, nor the wolf the dog, 402

  The owl thinks her children the fairest, 402

  The ox comes to the yoke at the call of his feeder, 197

  The ox spoke and said “Moo,”, 223

  The ox that tossed me threw me into a good place, 216, 270

  The ox without a bell is soon lost, 216

  The pan says to the pot, Keep off, or you’ll smutch me, 106

  The paunch warm, the foot sleepy, 204

  The people’s voice, God’s voice, 64, 132, 140, 174

  The pike grows big on small fry, 370

  The pitcher goes so often to the well that it gets broken at last,
  58, 139, 305, 383

  The pitcher goes so often to the well that it leaves its handle or
  its mouth, 131, 208, 258, 271

  The point of the thorn is small, but he who has felt it does not
  forget it, 97

  The poor man eats at double cost, 288

  The poor man has his crop destroyed by hail every year, 217

  The poor man seeks for food, the rich man for appetite, 368

  The poor man wants much, the miser everything, 353

  The poor man’s corn always grows thin, 368

  The poor must dance as the rich pipe, 140

  The poor-houses are filled with the honestest people, 211

  The pope and a peasant know more than the pope alone, 125

  The pope eats peasants, gulps gentlemen, and voids monks, 139

  The pot boils best on your own hearth, 365

  The pot that boils too much loses its flavour, 291

  The pot upbraids the kettle that it is black, 306

  The pride of the poor does not endure, 368

  The priest errs at the altar, 97

  The priest loves his flock, but the lambs more than the wethers, 139

  The priest to his book, the peasant to his plough, 395

  The proof of the pudding is in the eating, 307

  The rat does not leave the cat’s house with a bellyful, 274

  The rat that has but one hole is soon caught, 198, 354, 299 (_See_
  The mouse)

  The raven always thinks that her young ones are the whitest, 395

  The raven is fair when the rook is not by, 395

  The repeated stroke will fell the oak, 173

  The rich devour the poor, and the devil devours the rich, and so both
  are devoured, 306

  The rich have many friends, 337

  The rich man has more relations than he knows, 33

  The rich man transgresses the law, and the poor man is punished, 259

  The rich widow’s tears soon dry, 396

  The richest man carries nothing away with him but a shroud, 33

  The richest man, whatever his lot, is he who’s content with what he
  has got, 318

  The right hand is slave to the left, 105

  The righteous man sins before an open chest, 221

  The righteous pays for the sinner, 290

  The river does not swell with clear water, 102

  The river passed the saint forgotten, 118

  The road to heaven is equally short, where’er we die, 361

  The road to ruin is paved with good intentions, 139

  The roses fall, and the thorns remain, 108

  The rotten apple spoils its companion, 227

  The saint has no believers unless he works miracles, 114

  The saint who works no cures has few pilgrims to his shrine, 55

  The saint’s-day over, farewell the saint, 29

  The same fire purifies gold and consumes straw, 126

  The same shoe does not fit every foot, 74

  The scabbier the sheep the harder it bleats, 328

  The scalded cat (or dog) dreads cold water, 101, 223

  The scoffer’s own house is often on fire, 357

  The secret in swimming is to know how to take care of your clothes,
  226

  The secret of two is God’s secret, the secret of three is everybody’s
  secret, 56

  The servant wench that has a mother in town swoons seven times a day,
  250

  The shadow of a lord is a cap for a fool, 118

  The sharper soon (or easily) cheats the covetous man, 220, 290

  The she-bear thinks her cubs pretty, 70

  The sheep on the mountain is higher than the bull on the plain, 28

  The sheep that bleat most give the least milk, 367

  The sheep that bleats loses a mouthful, 9, 119, 238, 290

  The sheep that is too tame is sucked by too many lambs, 9

  The ship does not go without the boat, 106

  The shirt is nearer than the doublet, 66, 231, 398

  The shortest follies are the best, 35

  The shovel scouts the poker, 30

  The sick man is free to say all, 109

  The sick man is vexed with the flies on the wall, 137

  The sick man sleeps when the debtor cannot, 106

  The silent dog is the first to bite, 168

  The silent man is most trusted, 400

  The skin is nearer than the shirt, 30

  The sky is not the less blue because the blind man does not see it,
  374

  The smith’s dog sleeps at the noise of the hammer, and wakes at the
  grinding of teeth, 219

  The smoke of my own house is better than another man’s fire, 121

  The snail, to be rid of annoyances, bartered its eyes for horns, 216

  The soldier is well paid for doing mischief, 103

  The soldier’s blood exalts the captain, 103

  The son of an ass brays twice a day, 217

  The son-in-law’s sack is never full, 290

  The sound of the bell does not drive away rooks, 127

  The sow prefers the mire, 398

  The spider’s web lets the rat escape and catches the fly, 228

  The spot will come out in the washing, 197

  The steps at court are slippery, 401

  The stew mixed by many is ill-seasoned and worse cooked (Too many
  cooks spoil the broth), 238

  The stew that boils much loses flavour, 238

  The still swine eat the mash, the wild ones run past it, 352

  The stone is hard and the drop is small, but a hole is made by the
  constant fall, 228

  The stone that everybody spits upon will be wet at last, 356

  The strong man’s sport is the weak man’s death, 170

  The stronger the seam the worse the rent, 14

  The strongest is always in the right, 103

  The sun passes over filth and is not defiled, 71

  The sun shines for all the world, 35

  The sun will bring to light what lay under the snow, 141

  The sun-dial counts only the bright hours, 141

  The sweetest grapes hang highest, 141

  The sword and the ring according to the hand that bears them, 226,
  264

  The sword keeps the peace of the land, 403

  The tail is the hardest to scourge, 30, 105

  The tailor ill-dressed, the shoemaker ill-shod, 265

  The talker sows, the listener reaps, 85

  The teeth of the puppy are growing while the old dog is gnawing
  bones, 347

  The tender surgeon makes a foul wound, 102

  The thief becomes the gallows well, 269

  The thief cannot find any tree that suits him for a gallows, 147

  The thief is frightened even by a mouse, 69

  The thief proceeds from a needle to gold, and from gold to the
  gallows, 288

  The thief thinks that all men are like himself, 240, 288

  The thief’s wife does not always laugh, 114

  The third person makes good company, 304

  The thirteenth man brings death, 304

  The thorn comes into the world point foremost, 226

  The thread breaks where it is thinnest, 217

  The threatener loses the opportunity of vengeance, 215

  The threatener sometimes gets a drubbing, 58

  The threshold says nothing but what it hears of the hinge, 235

  The tired mare goes willingly to grass, 276

  The tired ox plants his foot firmly, 216

  The tongue goes where the tooth aches (or to the aching tooth), 29,
  94, 196, 280

  The tongue of a bad friend cuts more than a knife, 226

  The tongue wounds more than a lance, 61

  The tooth often bites the tongue, and yet they keep together, 400

  The town that parleys is half surrendered, 64

  The trade of thick-headed Michael: eating, drinking, and idling, 303

  The treason approved, the traitor abhorred, 172, 265

  The tree does not fall at the first stroke, 6, 31, 70, 304

  The tree is not felled at one blow, 68

  The tree is not to be judged of by its bark, 91

  The tree is sure to be pruned before it reaches the skies, 401

  The tree must be bent while it is young, 137

  The Trojans were wise too late, 128

  The two make a pair, 34

  The unbidden guest is ever a pest, 171

  The unfortunate know who are their real friends, 89

  The unrighteous penny consumes the righteous dollar, 172

  The upright never grow rich in a hurry, 396

  The venom is in the tail, 111

  The virtue of silence is a great piece of knowledge, 132

  The voice of the people is the voice of God, 262 (_See_ Vox Populi,
  vox Dei, in _Dict. of Quotations_)

  The waggon must go whither the horses draw it, 403

  The watch-dog does not get sweet milk unless there be drowned mice in
  it, 398

  The water breaks out where it is not expected, 94

  The water runs while the miller sleeps, 402

  The weakest goes to the wall, 125

  The weakest must hold the candle, 6

  The wedding feast is not made with mushrooms only, 237

  The weeping bride makes a laughing wife, 176

  The well-bred hound, if he does not hunt to-day will hunt to-morrow,
  216

  The well-dressed woman draws her husband away from another woman’s
  door, 227

  The well-fed man does not believe in hunger, 103

  The well-fed sheep makes a cloak of its tail, 227

  The wet branch burns better than the dry stone, 349

  The white coat does not make the miller, 107

  The wicked shun the light as the devil shuns the cross, 306

  The will gives the work its name, 140

  The will is everything, 107

  The will is taken for the deed, 37

  The will is the soul of the work, 140

  The wind does not always blow from the same quarter, 147

  The wine given to your workmen is that for which you get the best
  paid, 36

  The wine is not known by the hoops, 42

  The wine-skin has its reasons for smelling of pitch, 264

  The winter is gone, the spring is come, a fig for those who us good
  have done, 218

  The wise drunkard is a sober fool, 171

  The wise hand does not all that the tongue says, 227

  The wise knows that he does not know, the ignoramus thinks he knows,
  205

  The wise man does not hang his knowledge on a hook, 217

  The wise man has long ears and a short tongue, 139

  The wit one wants spoils what one has, 36

  The wolf and the fox are both in one story, 218

  The wolf bemoans the sheep, and then eats it, 102

  The wolf does that in the course of the week which hinders him from
  going to mass on Sunday, 218

  The wolf eats of what is counted, 211, 275 (_See_ Counted sheep)

  The wolf is always left out of the reckoning, 90

  The wolf is not always a wolf, 102

  The wolf is not so big as people make him (or The wolf is always said
  to be bigger than he is), 42, 126

  The wolf loses his teeth, but not his inclinations, 218, 233, 288

  The wolf picks the ass’s fleas by moonlight, 195

  The wolf preys not in his own field (or commits no mischief at home),
  218, 402

  The wolf will die in his skin, 32

  The woman in finery, the house in filth, but the doorway swept, 227

  The woman who gives is seldom good; the woman who accepts is in the
  power of the giver, 93

  The wood has ears, the field has eyes, 139

  The word of honour of a gentleman—another pledge would be better, 18

  The words are fair, said the wolf, but I will not come into the
  village, 307

  The work praises the workman, 137

  The workman is known by his work, 3, 70, 296

  The workman is worthy of his hire, 312

  The world belongs to the phlegmatic, 103

  The world is for him who has patience, 103

  The world is governed with little brains, 89

  The world is like a staircase; some go up, others go down, 103

  The world likes to be cheated, 307

  The world likes to have night-owls, that it may have matter for
  wonder, 141

  The world wags on with three things: doing, undoing, and pretending,
  103

  The world’s a stage; each plays his part, and takes his share, 307

  The worse service, the better luck, 328

  The worse the carpenter, the more the chips, 328

  The worse the dun, the worse the paymaster, 154

  The worst clothed go to windward, 35

  The worst ewe dungs in the milking-pail, 227

  The worst jests are those that are true, 11

  The worst of a lawsuit is that out of one there grow a hundred, 229

  The worst pig eats the best acorn (or pear), 70, 197, 289

  The worst wheel creaks most (or makes the most noise), 12, 96, 137,
  325, 328

  The worth of a thing is what it will bring, 295

  The wrath of brothers is the wrath of devils, 225, 280

  The wrong-doer never lacks a pretext, 66, 197

  The year has a wide mouth and a big belly, 346

  The young may die, the old must die, 138, 330

  The young pig must often suffer for what the old sow did, 394

  The young ravens are beaked like the old, 305

  Their dogs don’t hunt in couples, 36

  There are calumnies against which even innocence loses courage, 27

  There are eyes that fall in love with bleared ones (Fancy surpasses
  beauty), 238

  There are fagots and fagots (all are not alike), 27

  There are good and bad everywhere, 119

  There are good dogs of all sizes, 15

  There are ills that happen for good, 279

  There are many days in the year, and still more meals, 356

  There are many preachers who don’t hear themselves, 173

  There are many roads to Rome, 119

  There are more asses than carry sacks, 126

  There are more foolish buyers than foolish sellers, 27

  There are more old drunkards than old doctors, 43, 145

  There are more thieves than are hanged, 302

  There are more thieves than gibbets, 126

  There are more threatened than hurt, 121, 231

  There are no children now-a-days, 25

  There are no foolish trades, there are only foolish people, 25

  There are only two good women in the world: the one is dead, the
  other not to be found, 146

  There are some who despise pride with greater pride, 127

  There are some who see ill, and would like to see worse, 88

  There are three bad neighbours: great rivers, great lords, and great
  roads, 356

  There are three things from which no good can be got without a
  beating: a walnut-tree, a donkey, and a shrew, 401

  There are toys for all ages, 27

  There come just as many calf-skins to market as cow-skins, 146, 302

  There die as many lambs as wethers, 294

  There goes more than one ass to market, 98

  There is a cause for all things, 116

  There is a fool at every feast, 301

  There is a remedy for everything but death, 27, 43, 203, 317, 356

  There is always a Pharaoh who does not know Joseph, 146

  There is little peace in that house where the hen crows and the cock
  is mute, 104

  There is little use in watching a bad woman, 199

  There is more disputing about the shell than the kernel, 159

  There is never a cry of “Wolf!” but the wolf is in the district, 97

  There is never a great dunghill at a sportsman’s door, 200

  There is never enmity between the cook and the butler, 128

  There is never enough where nought is left, 115

  There is never wanting a dog to bark at you, 287

  There is no answer for Get out of my house, and What have you to do
  with my wife?, 195

  There is no appeal from time past, 91

  There is no beard so well shaven but another barber will find
  something more to shave from it, 115

  There is no beast so savage but sports with its mate, 236

  There is no better patch than one off the same cloth, 236

  There is no bush so small but casts its shadow, 26

  There is no chapel so small but has its saint, 25

  There is no choicer morsel than that which is stolen, 236

  There is no cure against a slanderer’s bite, 356

  There is no day without its night, 285

  There is no disputing about taste, 258

  There is no dog, be he ever so wicked, but wags his tail, 115

  There is no fire without smoke, 356

  There is no flavour in a swallowed morsel, 39

  There is no fool like a learned fool, 105

  There is no getting blood from a turnip, 90

  There is no good in preaching to the hungry, 137

  There is no helping him who will not be advised, 66

  There is no house without its hush! hush!, 236

  There is no hunting but with old hounds, 24

  There is no joy without alloy, 318

  There is no law but has a hole in it, for those who can find it out,
  146

  There is no lock if the pick is of gold, 236

  There is no love without jealousy, 25, 112

  There is no making pancakes without breaking the eggs, 84

  There is no mother like the mother that bore us, 236

  There is no need to bind up one’s head before it is broken, 111

  There is no need to blow what does not burn you, 358

  There is no need to fasten a bell to a fool, he is sure to tell his
  own tale, 390

  There is no occasion for priests to marry while peasants have wives,
  146

  There is no pleasure but palls, and the more so if it costs nothing,
  236, 285

  There is no pot so bad (or ugly) but finds its cover, 26, 236

  There is no pride like that of a beggar grown rich, 24

  There is no saint so petty but claims his own candle, 146

  There is no spite like that of a proud beggar, 25

  There is no stripping a naked man, 142

  There is no such thing as an insignificant enemy, 25

  There is no such witness as a good measure of wine, 236

  There is no tax upon lying, 219

  There is no thief without a receiver, 230

  There is no use in blowing a fire that burns well, 362

  There is no use in saying, I will not go such a way, nor drink of
  such a water, 113

  There is no virtue in a promise unless it be kept, 380

  There is no worse fruit than that which never ripens, 112

  There is no worse joke than a true one, 112, 115, 236

  There is no worse thief than a bad book, 115

  There is no worse water than that which sleeps, 24

  There is not a pair of ears for every Jew, 239

  There is nothing for which the boors pray so much to God as that the
  horses of the squirearchy may not die, for otherwise they would ride
  the boors with spurs, 140

  There is nothing so bad but may be of some use, 156

  There is nothing so secret but it transpires, 317

  There is nothing so well done but may be mended, 25

  There is plenty of corn in Castile, but he who has none starves, 284

  There is some distance between Peter and Peter, 196

  There never was a banquet so sumptuous but some one dined ill at it,
  25

  There never was a looking-glass that told a woman she was ugly, 25

  There never was a shoe, however handsome, that did not become an ugly
  slipper, 113

  There were never fewer nobles than when all would be so, 346

  There would be no ill word if it were not ill taken, 235

  There’s cunning in—a pointed chin, 169

  There’s many a knave concealed under a surplice, 366

  There’s neither rhyme nor reason in him, 25

  There’s no argument like that of the stick, 236

  There’s no catching trouts with dry breeches, 286

  There’s no disputing about tastes, 91

  There’s no getting to heaven in a coach, 114

  There’s no guarding against the privy thief, 16

  There’s no handsome woman on the wedding-day, except the bride, 285

  There’s no living without friends, 285

  There’s no making a donkey drink against his will, 112, 332

  There’s no making a good cloak of bad cloth, 212

  There’s no making a silk purse of a sow’s ear, 332

  There’s no making apples of plums, 165

  There’s no need to grease the fat pig’s rump, 42

  There’s no putting off a lie upon the belly, 138

  There’s no showing the wolf to a bad dog, 3

  There’s no smoke without fire, 112

  There’s no turning a windmill with a pair of bellows, 114

  There’s not enough if there’s not too much, 5

  There’s nothing like being bespattered for making a man defy the
  gutter, 25

  There’s nothing like having the key of the fields, 25

  There’s nothing new under the sun, 145

  There’s virtue in a man’s face (_i. e._ presence carries weight), 17

  They agree like cats and dogs, 345

  They are all honest men, but my cloak is not to be found, 259

  They are rich who have friends, 201, 267

  They may whip me in the market-place, so it be not known at home, 259

  They must be strong legs that can support prosperous days, 147

  They must hunger in frost who spring-time have lost, 182

  “They say” is a fool (or a liar), 41, 126

  They took away the mirror from me because I was ugly, and gave it to
  the blind woman, 254

  They understand one another like thieves in a fair, 345

  They whip the cat if our mistress does not spin, 204

  They who are often at the looking-glass seldom spin, 344

  They who come from afar have leave to lie, 173, 311

  They who deserve honour fail of it, and they who obtain it do not
  deserve it, 181

  They who do not wash well do not bleach well, 378

  They who don’t keep goats and yet sell kids, where do they get them?,
  230

  They who don’t kill pigs must not expect black-puddings, 201

  They who eat cherries with the great are like to have the stones and
  stalks flung in their face, 162

  They who fight with golden weapons are pretty sure to prove their
  right, 310

  They who shun the smoke often fall into the fire, 126

  They wrangle about an egg and let the hens fly away, 169

  Thick wine is better than clear water, 97

  Things are not as they are, but as they are regarded, 108

  Things promised are things due, 13 (_See_ Promises make debts)

  Think much, say little, write less, 45, 119

  Think of many things, do one, 273

  Thinking is not knowing, 273

  Thinking of where you are going, you forget whence you came, 273

  Thirst comes from drinking, 75

  Thirteen nuns, fourteen children!, 141

  Thistles and thorns prick sore, but evil tongues prick more, 311

  Those besoms can be sold cheapest which are stolen ready made, 140

  Those who climb high often have a fall, 378

  Though a lie be swift, truth overtakes it, 75

  Though my father-in-law is a good man, I do not like a dog with a
  bell, 203

  Though the ass may carry a sack of gold, it feeds on thistles, 348

  Though the bird may fly over your head, let it not make its nest in
  your hair, 368

  Though the fool waits, the day does not, 54

  Though the fox runs, the pullets have wings, 75

  Though the heron flies high the falcon kills it, 264

  Though the speaker be a fool, let the hearer be wise, 203

  Though we are negroes, we are men, and have souls, 264

  Though you are a prudent old man, do not despise counsel, 204

  Though you seat the frog on a golden stool, he’ll soon jump off and
  into the pool, 168

  Though you see me with this coat, I have another up the mountain, 203

  Though you teach a wolf the pater-noster, he will say, “Lamb! lamb!”,
  383

  Though your bloodhound (or mastiff) be gentle, don’t bite him on the
  lip, 203, 264

  Thought when sober, said when drunk, 164

  Thoughts are toll-free, but not hell-free, 149

  Thousands drink themselves to death before one dies of thirst, 147

  Threads do not break for being fine, but for being gouty and
  ill-spun, 285

  Threatened folks eat bread, 229, 294

  Threats are arms for the threatened, 108

  Threats don’t kill (Men don’t die of threats), 340

  Three brothers, three castles, 60, 128, 295

  Three daughters and a mother, four devils for the father, 260

  Three know it, all know it, 128

  Three or four daily will bring you to the bottom of the sack, 270

  Three removals are as bad as a fire, 60, 141

  Three things drive a man out of doors: smoke, dropping water (or a
  leaky roof), and a shrew, 128

  Three things kill a man: a scorching sun, suppers, and cares, 260

  Three who help each other are as good as six, 204

  Three women and a goose make a market, 128, 312, 401

  Three women, three geese, and three frogs, make a fair, 141

  Thrift is better than an annuity, 39

  Through being too knowing the fox lost his tail, 119

  Through not spending enough, we spend too much, 241

  Throw no stones at a sleeping dog, 389

  Throw not the child out with the bath, 382

  Throw not thy hatchet at the Lord, He will turn the sharp edge
  against thee, 382

  Throw that bone to another dog, 200, 266

  Thrust not thy finger into a fool’s mouth, 338

  Thunder-showers and great men’s favour are always partial, 401

  Tie me hand and foot and throw me among my own people, 108

  Time and opportunity are in no man’s sleeve, 191

  Time and place make the thief, 170, 338

  Time and straw make medlars ripe, 334

  Time and the hour are not to be tied with a rope, 295

  Time and the hour run through the roughest day, 191

  Time and tide wait for no man, 190

  Time betrays and hangs the thief, 191

  Time brings everything, to those who can wait for it, 190

  Time brings roses, 190, 307

  Time covers and discovers everything, 191

  Time destroys all things, 307

  Time gained, much gained, 339

  Time goes, death comes, 307

  Time is anger’s medicine, 190

  Time is an inaudible file, 104

  Time is God’s and ours, 307

  Time is money, 339

  Time is not tied to a post, like a horse to the manger, 400

  Time is the best counsellor (or preacher), 138, 190

  Time is the herald of truth, 190

  Time makes hay, 190

  Time passes like the wind, 295

  Time past never returns, 307

  Time waits for no man, 400

  Time, wind, women, and fortune, are ever changing, 191

  Timid dogs bark most, 173

  Tired folks are quarrelsome, 34

  Tired oxen tread hard, 162

  ’Tis a fat bird that bastes itself, 323

  ’Tis a good farthing that saves a penny, 9

  ’Tis a good horse that has no fault, 24

  ’Tis a long day, a day without bread, 12

  ’Tis a silly sheep that makes the wolf her confessor, 18, 110

  ’Tis a wise child that knows its own father, 323

  ’Tis as necessary to him as gold weights are to a beggar, 303

  ’Tis best to woo where you can see the smoke, 322

  ’Tis easier to hurt than heal, 172

  ’Tis everywhere the same as here, 11

  ’Tis good feasting in other men’s houses, 108

  ’Tis hard to swim against the stream, 187

  ’Tis possible if true, 56

  ’Tis the mind ennobles, not the blood, 141

  ’Tis too late to spare when the pocket (or cask) is bare, 191, 324

  ’Tis well that wicked cows have short horns, 323

  ’Tis written, “What’s not your own, that let alone,”, 146

  To a bold man fortune holds out her hand, 2

  To a crazy ship every wind is contrary, 71

  To a depraved taste sweet is bitter, 196

  To a friend’s house the road is never long, 360

  To a good cat a good rat, 1

  To a hard knot a hard wedge, 198

  To a hasty demand a leisure reply, 200, 263

  To a quick ear half a word, 190

  To a rogue a rogue and a half, 2

  To a son-in-law and a hog you need show the way but once, 198

  To a woman and a magpie tell your secrets in the market-place, 195

  To a young heart everything is sport, 68

  To ask wool of an ass, 15

  To bait and to grease does not retard a journey, 348

  To be a merchant, the art consists more in getting paid than in
  making sales, 256

  To be content to let twelve pennies pass for a shilling, 132

  To be led by the nose, 345

  To be like a bunch of nettles, 256

  To be like a fish in the water, 277

  To be like a leek, a grey head and the rest green, 256

  To be like a louse in a seam, 256

  To be like a tailor’s pattern-book, 256

  To be like the esquire of Guadalaxara, who knew nothing in the
  morning of what he said at night, 256

  To be like the tailor of Campillo, who worked for nothing and found
  thread, 256

  To be slow to give, and to refuse, are the same thing, 58, 295

  To beards with money cavaliers pay respect, 195

  To beat the dog in presence of the lion, 7

  To become rich in this world, it needs only to turn one’s back on
  God, 119

  To begin skinning the eel at the tail, 16

  To blow hot and cold, 57

  To break the constable’s head, and take refuge with the sheriff, 212

  To bring down two apples with one stick, 339

  To build castles in the air, 18, 330

  To burn out a candle in search of a pin, 19

  To buy a cat in a poke, 2

  To cackle and lay no egg, 206, 270

  To carry a lantern in mid-day, 46

  To carry fir-trees to Norway (To carry coals to Newcastle), 338

  To carry water to the sea (or river), 46, 176, 280, 343

  To cast pearls before swine, 99, 336

  To catch a hare with a cart, 120

  To catch two pigeons with one bean, 12

  To change and to better are two different things, 133

  To change one’s habits smacks of death, 284

  To circumstances and custom the law must yield, 368

  To commit the sheep to the care of the wolf, 221

  To cover the well after the child has been drowned in it, 137

  To cry famine on a heap of corn, 14

  To cry up wine, and sell vinegar, 242

  To cut broad thongs from another man’s leather, 18 (_See_ Broad
  thongs)

  To cut into another man’s ear is like cutting into a felt hat, 348

  To-day for money, to-morrow for nothing, 152, 339

  To-day in finery, to-morrow in filth, 152

  To-day in gold, to-morrow in the mould, 380

  To-day must borrow nothing of to-morrow, 152

  To-day red, to-morrow dead, 152, 321

  To-day stately and brave, to-morrow in the grave, 321

  To-day’s sorrow brings nought to-morrow (Sorrow will pay no debts),
  325

  To discover truth by telling a falsehood, 255

  To do like the monkey, get the chesnuts out of the fire with the
  cat’s paw, 17

  To do nothing teacheth to do evil, 335

  To do, one must be doing, 42

  To draw the foot out of the mire, 255

  To draw the snake out of the hole with another’s hand, 209

  To eat and to scratch, one has but to begin, 209

  To eat, drink, and sleep together, is marriage, methinks, 8

  To err is human (to forgive, divine), 154, 312

  To every bird its nest seems fair, 6

  To every evil-doer his evil day, 193

  To every fool his cap, 329

  To every lord every honour, 6

  To every one his own is not too much, 155

  To every saint his candle, 2, 68

  To exchange a one-eyed horse for a blind one, 12

  To expect what never comes, to lie in bed and not sleep, to serve
  well and not be advanced, are three things to die of, 73

  To fall from the wall into the ditch (Out of the frying-pan into the
  fire), 340

  To fall out of the frying-pan into the fire, 76, 340

  To fawn with the tail and bite with the mouth, 223

  To fetch water after the house is burned, 226

  To find oneself in tight breeches (Ill at ease—_we say_, In tight
  boots), 261

  To flay the flayed dog, 125

  To flee and to run are not all one, 224

  To get out of one muck into another, 255

  To get out of the mire and fall into the river, 278

  To get out of the rain under the spout, 134

  To get out of the smoke and fall into the fire, 278

  To get the chicks one must coax the hen, 21

  To give a pea for a bean (A Rowland for an Oliver), 55

  To give an egg to get an ox, 16, 313

  To give change out for his coin, 55

  To give counsel to a fool is like throwing water on a goose, 348

  To give court holy-water, 16

  To give is honour, to beg is dishonour, 274

  To give is honour, to lose is grief, 217

  To give one the sack, 329

  To give quickly is to give doubly, 135

  To give tardily is to refuse, 58, 295

  To go for wool and come back shorn, 225

  To go mulberry-gathering without a crook, 3

  To go rabbit-catching with a dead ferret, 199

  To go safely through the world you must have the eye of a falcon, the
  ear of an ass, the face of an ape, the mouth of a pig, the shoulders
  of a camel, and the legs of a deer, 87

  To go to the vintage without baskets, 3

  To God’s council-chamber there is no key, 372

  To good eating belongs good drinking, 134

  To grease the fat pig’s tail, 197

  To grow rich one has only to turn his back on God, 24

  To hang your sickle on another man’s corn, 307

  To harness the horses behind the cart (To put the cart before the
  horse), 306

  To have a belly up to one’s mouth, 259

  To have friends both in heaven and hell, 7

  To have hairs on his heart (Hard-hearted), 259

  To have “heard say” is half a lie, 74

  To have it written on his forehead, 259

  To have luck needs little wit, 132

  To have one eye on the cat and another on the frying-pan, 74

  To have one’s brains in one’s heels, 259

  To have the foot in two shoes, 259

  To him who can take all you have, give what he asks, 67

  To him who gives you a capon you may spare a leg and a wing, 197, 252

  To him who gives you a pig you may well give a rasher, 67

  To him who is determined it remains only to act, 67

  To him who watches, everything is revealed, 67, 201

  To hold the wolf by the ears, 58

  To jump into the water for fear of the rain, 56

  To jump out of the frying-pan into the fire, 55, 255

  To keep one upon hot coals, 258

  To kick against the pricks, 259

  To kill a mercer for a comb, 60

  To kill the hen by way of getting the egg, 60

  To kill two birds with one stone, 282, 339

  To know a man well one must have eaten a bushel of salt with him, 46

  To know everything is to know nothing, 129

  To know the law and do the right are two things, 348

  To lather an ass’s head is only wasting soap, 262, 277

  To laugh in one’s sleeve, 330

  To live from hand to mouth, 64

  To live long is to suffer long, 383

  To lock the stable after the horses are stolen, 93

  To look for a needle in a bundle (or bottle) of hay, 13, 143

  To look for five feet in a cat, 206

  To look for noon at fourteen o’clock, 13

  To lose one eye that you may deprive another of two, 245

  To love and to be wise are two different things (or impossible), 2,
  198, 265

  To mad words deaf ears, 200

  To make a happy couple, the husband must be deaf and the wife blind,
  46

  To make a virtue of necessity, 18, 340

  To make an elephant of a fly (To make a mountain of a molehill), 98

  To make coqs-à-l’âne, 340

  To make of a flea a knight cap-à-pie, 277

  To make one hole by way of stopping another, 18

  To make the cart go you must grease the wheels, 119

  To make two hits with one stone, 18

  To make two nails at one heat, 98

  To marry once is a duty; twice a folly; thrice is madness, 316

  To-morrow will be another day, 230

  To-morrow’s remedy will not ward off the evil of to-day, 239

  To offer one candle to God and another to the devil, 16

  To one who has a pie in the oven you may give a bit of your cake, 1

  To parade the gallows before the town, 233

  To pay one in his own coin, 118, 291, 329

  To piece the lion’s skin with that of the fox, 325

  To pluck the goose without making it cry out, 45

  To pray to the saint until the danger is past, 254

  To preserve friendship one must build walls, 119

  To promise is easy, to keep is troublesome, 385

  To promise more butter than bread, 47

  To promise more carts than oxen, 121

  To promise much means giving little, 284

  To protest and knock one’s head against the wall is what everybody
  can do, 122

  To pull down the house for the sake of the mortar, 124

  To put a good face on a bad game, 17

  To put in a needle and take out a bar, 232

  To put on one’s doublet before one’s shirt, 110

  To put out the fire with tow, 126

  To put the plough before the oxen (or cart before the horse), 38

  To put water into a basket (To pour water into a sieve), 342

  To quarrel over a straw, 336

  To quench fire with fire, 255

  To rain upon the wet, 272

  To reckon without the hostess, 223, 277

  To rise at five, dine at nine, sup at five, go to bed at nine, makes
  a man live to ninety-nine, 36

  To rise at six, eat at ten, sup at six, go to bed at ten, makes a man
  live years ten times ten, 36

  To rob a robber is not robbing, 64

  To rude words deaf ears, 4

  To save at the spiggot, and let it run out at the bung-hole (_Also
  Scotch_), 160

  To save for old age, earning one maravedi and drinking three, 195

  To scare a bird is not the way to catch it, 54

  To see the sky through a funnel, 261

  To see the mote in another’s eye and not the beam in your own, 307

  To sell a cat for a hare, 261, 295

  To sell honey to a bee-keeper, 131, 261, 295

  To sell the bird in the bush, 131

  To sell the skin of the bear before it is caught, 131

  To send one arrow after another, 215

  To sew the fox’s skin to the lion’s, 14

  To shave an egg, 313

  To shiver at work, and sweat at meals, 196

  To show the sun with a torch, 39

  To sign for both parties, 56

  To sing out of tune and persist in it, 208

  To sink a well by the river side, 163

  To spend much and gain little is the sure road to ruin, 173

  To spur a horse on level ground, 122

  To squeeze an eel too hard is the way to lose it, 44

  To start the hare for another’s profit, 280

  To steal the leather, and give away the shoes for God’s sake, 137

  To steal the pig, and give away the pettitoes for God’s sake, 124,
  225, 278

  To stop the hole after the mischief is done, 254

  To strip one altar to cover another, 125

  To strip Peter to clothe Paul, 14, 127 (To rob Peter to pay Paul)

  To swallow a camel, and strain at a gnat, 259

  To swallow both sea and fish, 307

  To swim and swim more, and be drowned on shore, 233

  To swim between two waters, 40

  To take one foot out of the mire and put the other into it, 255

  To take opportunity by the forelock, 46, 259

  To take out a burning coal with another’s hand (To make a cat’s-paw
  of one), 255

  To take the chesnuts out of the fire with the cat’s paw, 58

  To take Villadiego’s boots (To take to your heels), 259

  To the bold man fortune gives her hand, 196, 266

  To the devil with so many masters, said the toad to the harrow, 6

  To the fallen tree, hatchets! hatchets!, 67

  To the grateful man give more than he asks, 195

  To the jaundiced all things seem yellow, 59

  To the lean pig a fat acorn (_See_ The worst pig), 265

  To the looker-on no work is too hard, 137

  To thrash one’s jacket, 262

  To throw oil on the fire, 336

  To throw in a smelt to catch a codfish, 316

  To throw the halter after the ass, 128

  To throw the helve after the hatchet, 28, 215

  To throw the rope after the bucket, 99

  To throw the stone and conceal the hand, 259

  To throw up a feather in the air, and see where it falls, 215

  To turn fishmonger on Easter-eve, 56

  To undo crosses in a straw-loft (_i. e._ to part all the straws that
  they may not lie crosswise; to be over nice), 213

  To wait and be patient soothes many a pang, 348

  To wash a blackamoor white, 323

  To wash an ass’s head is but loss of time and soap (To reprove a fool
  is but lost labour), 3

  To whom do you offer your shells for sale? To people who come from
  Saint Michel (where shells abound), 5

  To whom you tell your secret you surrender your freedom, 66

  To wipe up the sea with a sponge, 308

  To withhold truth is to bury gold, 348

  To wolf’s flesh dog’s teeth, 193, 264

  To work for the bishop (Prayers, but no pay), 259

  To your son give a good name and a trade, 203

  Too keen an edge does not cut, too fine a point does not pierce, 60

  Too late the bird cries out when it is caught, 6

  Too little and too much spoils everything, 368

  Too many cooks oversalt the porridge, 341

  Too many sacks are the death of the ass, 173

  Too much bursts the bag, 133

  Too much familiarity breeds contempt, 266

  Too much humility is pride, 191

  Too much is not enough, 133

  Too much of one thing is good for nothing, 338

  Too much scratching smarts, too much talking harms, 60

  Too much wax burns the church, 266

  Too much will soon break, 191

  Too much wisdom is folly, 191

  Too much zeal spoils all, 60

  Touch a galled horse and he’ll wince, 337

  Touch not another man’s money, for the most honest never added to it,
  40

  Translators, traitors, 128

  Travel east or travel west, a man’s own house is still the best, 339

  Treachery and slander are long lived, 399

  Treachery lurks in honeyed words, 402

  Tread on a worm and it will turn, 63

  Trees often transplanted seldom prosper, 302

  Trick against trick, 159

  Trickery comes back to its master, 60

  Trim my beard and I will trim your topknot, 18

  Tripe broth, you make much of yourself, 207

  Trouts are not caught with dry breeches, 237

  True jokes never please, 9

  True love never grows old, 71

  True love suffers no concealment, 215

  True nobility is invulnerable, 64

  Trueman’s house stands the longest, 174

  Trust, beware whom!, 171

  Trust, but not too much, 171

  Trust everybody, but thyself most, 401

  Trust in God upon good security, 40, 222

  Trust no one till you have eaten a bushel of salt with him, 171

  Trust not a dog that limps, 285

  Trust not a skittish horse, nor a great lord, when they shake their
  heads, 389

  Trust not still water nor a silent man, 401

  Trust not tow with firebrands, nor a woman with men, 286

  Trust not your gossip to a priest who has been a friar, 194

  Trust not your money to one whose eyes are bent on the ground, 212

  Trust was a good man, Trust-not was a better, 98

  Trust-well rides away with the horse, 170

  Truth and folly dwell in the wine-cask, 397

  Truth and oil always come to the surface, 228, 268

  Truth creeps not into corners, 174

  Truth finds no asylum, 174

  Truth gives a short answer, lies go round about, 174

  Truth ill-timed is as bad as a lie (Truth should not always be
  revealed), 172

  Truth is bitter food, 397

  Truth is lost with too much debating, 333

  Truth is the club that knocks down and kills everybody, 31

  Truth is the daughter of time, 174, 307

  Truth makes the tongue smart, 174

  Truth may be suppressed, but not strangled, 174

  Truth must be seasoned to make it palatable, 357

  Truth’s cloak is often lined with lies, 400

  Turn your tongue seven times before speaking, 23

  ’Twixt the spoon and the lip the morsel may slip, 339 (_See_ Between,
  &c.)

  ’Twixt the word and the deed there’s a long step, 16

  Two are the masters of one, 401

  Two birds of prey do not keep each other company, 215

  Two cannot fall out if one does not choose, 245

  Two cats and one mouse, two women in one house, two dogs to one bone,
  will not agree long, 192

  Two cocks in one house, a eat and a mouse, an old man and a young
  wife, are always in strife, 339

  Two cocks in one yard do not agree, 113

  Two dogs over one bone seldom agree, 191, 339

  Two eyes see more than one, 282

  Two eyes, two ears, only one mouth, 191

  Two false men to one traitor, 204

  Two hard flints never grind well, 191

  Two heads are better than one, 95

  Two may lie so as to hang a third, 401

  Two men may meet, but never two mountains, 15

  Two of a trade never agree, 249

  Two sparrows on one ear of corn never agree, 15, 194

  Two women and a goose make a market, 94


  U.

  Unbending the bow does not heal the wound, 14, 72, 120

  Under a gold sheath a leaden knife, 258

  Under a good cloak may be a bad man, 210

  Under a shabby cloak may be a smart drinker, 210, 274

  Under fair words beware of fraud, 274

  Under my cloak I command (or kill) the king, 210, 258

  Under the sackcloth there is something else, 258, 274

  Under white ashes are often glowing embers, 126, 402

  Union is strength, 317

  Unlaid eggs are uncertain chickens, 135, 171, 336

  Unlooked-for, often comes, 172

  Until death there is no knowing what may befal, 99

  Until hell is full no lawyer will ever be saved, 56

  Unwilling service earns no thanks, 402

  Unworthy offspring brag the most of their worthy descent, 394

  Upbraiding makes a benefit an injury, 60

  Upon a slight pretext the wolf takes the sheep, 4

  Upon an egg the hen lays an egg, 57


  V.

  Vainglory bears no grain, 29

  Vainglory blossoms, and bears no fruit, 223

  Vanity has no greater foe than vanity, 31

  Various are the roads to fame, 69

  Very good corn grows in little fields, 17

  Very hard times in the wood when the wolves eat each other, 21

  Vetches seem bitter to the full-cropped pigeon, 67

  Vice is learnt without a schoolmaster, 401

  Vile let him be who thinks himself vile (or base), 293

  Vipers breed vipers, 346

  Virtue consists in action, 307

  Virtue flourishes in misfortune, 171

  Virtue in the middle, said the devil, when seated between two
  lawyers, 364

  Virtue is its own reward, 304

  Virtue never dies, 171

  Virtue subdues power, 171


  W.

  Wait is a hard word to the hungry, 137

  Wait time and place to take your revenge, for it is never well done
  in a hurry, 73

  Wake not a sleeping cat (or dog), 40, 115, 167, 337

  Walls have ears, 35, 141, 268, 306

  Walls sink and dunghills rise, 193, 263

  Want and necessity break faith and oaths, 401

  War begun, hell unchained, 100

  War is pleasant to him who does not go to it (or who has not tried
  it), 139, 275

  War makes robbers, and peace hangs them, 29, 106

  War with all the world, and peace with England, 209

  Wash a dog, comb a dog, still a dog remains a dog, 31, 401

  Wasting is a bad habit, sparing a sure income, 338

  Watching a woman is labour in vain, 176

  Water afar does not quench a fire at hand, 67

  Water is the strongest drink; it drives mills, 176

  Water past will not turn the mill, 67, 195

  Water, smoke, and a vicious woman, drive men out of the house, 67
  (_See_ Smoke, &c.)

  Water washes everything, 263

  Wax, flax, and tin; much out and little in, 342

  We are all well placed, said the cat, when she was seated on the
  bacon, 403

  We are both carriers, and shall meet on the road, 202

  We are not yet roasting, and already we are basting (or make sops in
  the pan), 203, 230

  We beat the sack and mean the miller, 160

  We cannot all be Pope of Rome, 188

  We do in haste what we repent at leisure (Marry in haste and repent
  at leisure), 161

  We give to the rich and take from the poor, 166

  We hang little thieves and let great ones escape, 305 (_See_ Great
  thieves hang, &c.)

  We hang little thieves and take off our hats to great ones, 157

  We have no son, and yet are giving him a name, 224

  We have not yet saddled, and are already mounted (or riding), 203, 264

  We knock in jest and it is opened in earnest, 153

  We know what we have, but not what we shall get, 161

  We learn by teaching, 104

  We must bear our cross with patience, said the man when he took his
  wife on his back, 388

  We must eat and drink though every tree were a gallows, 147, 333
  (_See_ A man must eat)

  We must sow even after a bad harvest, 389

  We must suffer much or die young, 389

  We shall see, as the blind man said, 40

  Wealth is not his who makes it, but his who enjoys it, 107

  Weather, wind, women, and fortune, change like the moon, 58

  Wedlock rides in the saddle and repentance on the crupper, 18

  Weeds never die, 172, 402

  Weight and measures save a man toil, 240

  Weighty work must be done with few words, 403

  Welcome, misfortune, if thou comest alone, 205, 221

  Well begun is half done, 20, 76, 78, 151, 190, 206, 270, 287, 313, 403

  Well-done outlives death, 190

  Well fed but ill taught, 8

  Well-regulated charity begins with one’s self (or at home), 13

  Were all adulterers to wear grey coats the cloth would be dear, 169

  Were every one to sweep before his own house, every street would be
  clean, 298

  Were fools silent they would pass for wise, 345

  Were he to throw a groat on the roof it would come down a dollar, 188

  Were I a hatter, men would come into the world without heads, 174

  Were it a wolf it would spring at your throat, 56

  Were it not for “if” and “but,” we should all be rich for ever, 56

  Were the devil to come from hell to fight, there would forthwith be a
  Frenchman to accept the challenge, 56

  Were the sky to fall, not an earthen pot would be left whole, 341
  (_See_ If the sky, &c.)

  Were there no fools there would be no wise men, 149

  Were you at the wedding, Molly? No, mother, but the bride was very
  fine, 230

  What a monk thinks, he dares, 10

  What a woman wills, God wills, 10, 229

  What belongs to the ravens is never drowned, 175

  What can’t be cured must be endured, 175, 290

  What children hear their parents say by the fireside they repeat in
  the highway, 213

  What Christ (or the Church) does not take the Exchequer takes, 176,
  229

  What comes from the fife goes back to the drum (Lightly come, lightly
  go; or, what is got over the devil’s back is spent under his belly),
  11

  What comes from the heart, goes to the heart, 176

  What comes seldom, comes sharp, 176

  What costs little is little esteemed, 123

  What costs nothing is worth nothing, 343

  What cures Sancho makes Martha sick, 209

  What does not happen in a year may happen in a moment, 229

  What does not poison, fattens, 123

  What does the moon care if the dogs bark at her?, 175

  What force cannot do ingenuity may, 229

  What God hath joined together let no man put asunder, 175

  What harm is there in a good word? It costs nothing, 176

  What has horns will gore, 343

  What has not been, may be, 123

  What I see with my eyes I can guess with my fingers, 229

  What is another’s always pines for its master, 229, 294

  What is bad for one is good for another, 11

  What is bought is cheaper than a gift, 89, 281

  What is bred in the bone won’t out of the flesh, 343

  What is done cannot be undone, 102, 123, 370

  What is done, is done for this time, 229

  What is enough was never little, 11

  What is got by begging is dearly bought, 351

  What is in use, wants no excuse, 229

  What is learned in the cradle lasts till the grave, 11

  What is long spoken of happens at last (Long looked for comes at
  last), 333

  What is lost in the fire must be sought in the ashes, 309

  What is marriage, mother? Daughter, it is spinning, bearing children,
  and weeping, 281

  What is mine is my own; my brother Juan’s is his and mine, 229

  What is much desired is not believed when it comes, 229

  What is new is always fine, 6

  What is no sin, is no shame, 175

  What is not taken by the Church is taken by the Exchequer, 176

  What is play to the strong is death to the weak, 399

  What is right for the one is reasonable for the other, 175

  What is said is said, and no sponge can wipe it out, 149

  What is sport (or play) to the cat is death to the mouse, 141, 382

  What is sweet in the mouth is not always good in the stomach, 358

  What is the use of running, when we are not on the right road?, 175

  What is too high, that let fly, 175

  What is true is not always probable, 36

  What is whispered in your ear tell not to your husband, 229

  What is worth receiving is worth returning (Give and take), 59

  What is wrong to-day won’t be right to-morrow, 343

  What! keep a dog and bark myself? 175

  What keeps out the cold keeps out the heat, 123

  What lay hidden under the snow cometh to light at last, 325

  What man has made, man can destroy, 175

  What Master Jacky does not learn, Mr. John never knows, 175

  What much is worth comes from the earth, 229

  What my neighbour eats does my stomach no good, 229

  What one does not bake, another brews, 175

  What ripens fast does not last, 174

  What smarts, teaches, 176

  What the abbot of Bamba cannot eat he gives away for the good of his
  soul, 215

  What the child hears at the fireside is soon known at the parish
  church, 10

  What the colt learns in youth he continues in old age, 11 (_See_ What
  youth learns)

  What the eye sees not, the heart craves not, 343

  What the eye sees not, the heart rues not, 10, 115, 174

  What the eyes see, the heart believes, 175

  What the fool does at last the wise man does at first, 229, 290

  What the gauntlet wins the gorget consumes, 10

  What the lion cannot, the fox can, 175

  What the peacock has too little on his head, he has too much on his
  tail, 175

  What the she-wolf does (or brings forth) pleases the he-wolf, 10, 229

  What the sober man has in his heart, the drunken man has on his lips,
  358

  What the sober man thinks, the drunkard tells, 10, 342

  What three know everybody knows, 229

  What three know will soon be known to thirty, 175

  What was hard to bear is sweet to remember, 290

  What water gives, water takes away, 263

  What we want in hay we make up in straw, 175

  What will be, will be, 77

  What you can’t have, abuse, 123

  What you dislike for yourself do not like for me, 229

  What you do, do quickly, 175

  What you do, do thoroughly (Age quod agis), 22

  What you do yourself is well done, 397

  What you _give_, is written in sand; what you _take_, with an iron
  hand, 177

  What you learn to your cost you remember long, 362

  What you lend to a friend an enemy sues for, 175

  What youth learns age does not forget, 363

  Whatever way you take there is a league of bad road, 241

  What’s everybody’s business is nobody’s business, 238, 287

  What’s of no use is too dear at a gift, 176

  What’s the use of putting honey in an ass’s mouth, 176

  When a cow is lost it is something to recover its tail, were it only
  to make a handle for one’s door, 16

  When a dog runs away, hit him! hit him!, 65

  When a fox is in his hole smoke fetches him out, 262

  When a good offer comes for your daughter, don’t wait till her father
  returns from market, 243

  When a man has fallen into the mire, the more he flounders the more
  he fouls himself, 83

  When a man is down everybody runs over him, 179

  When a man is in a sack, he must get out at the mouth or at the
  bottom, 392

  When a man is not used to breeches the seams gall him, 250

  When a man is rich he begins to save, 178

  When a mouse has fallen into a meal sack, he thinks he is the miller
  himself, 298

  When a peasant gets rich, he knows neither relations nor friends, 244

  When a thing is done advice comes too late, 2

  When a thing is done, make the best of it (Make the best of a bad
  bargain), 191

  When a tree is falling, every one cries, Down with it, 67

  When Adam delved and Eve span, who was then the gentleman, 133, 339

  When all other sins are old avarice is still young, 48

  When an old dog barks, look out (When the old dog barks, he giveth
  counsel), 135, 298

  When an old man cannot drink, prepare his grave, 244

  When anger blinds the eyes truth disappears, 379

  When apes climb high they show their naked rumps, 297 (_See_ The
  higher)

  When blind leads blind both fall into the ditch, 178

  When bulls fight, woe to the frogs, 291

  When cat and mouse agree the farmer has no chance, 391

  When eats are mousing they don’t mew, 297

  When Christ was alone the devil tempted him, 133

  When David grew old he sang pious psalms, 133

  When dirt comes to honour it knows not what to be, 392

  When drink enters, wisdom departs, 214

  When every man gets his own the devil gets nothing, 391

  When every one minds his own business the work is done, 391

  When every one says you are an ass, bray, 244

  When every one sees that you are a pig, why don’t you go into the
  sty?, 297

  When everybody says you are drunk, go to sleep, 123

  When flies swarm in March sheep come to their death, 298

  When fools go to market, pedlars (or hucksters) make money, 298, 391

  When fortune’s chariot rolls easily, envy and shame cling to the
  wheels, 369

  When fortune knocks, open the door, 123, 177

  When glory comes, memory departs, 48

  When gnats swarm in January the peasant becomes a beggar, 298

  When God gives light he gives it for all, 243

  When God means to punish a nation, He deprives its rulers of wisdom,
  178, 298

  When God pleases it rains in fair weather, 243

  When God pleases it rains with every wind, 243, 299

  When God says To-day, the devil says To-morrow, 178

  When God sends flour the devil carries off the sack, 47

  When God will not the saints cannot, 122, 243, 298

  When gold speaks every tongue is silent, 94

  When goods increase the body decreases, 47

  When had comes, have is too late, 299

  When he was born, Solomon passed by his door, and would not go in, 255

  When his head is broken he puts on his helmet, 124

  When I have money in my purse, I have food in my mouth, 391

  When I was born I wept, and every day brings a reason why, 213

  When I’m dead, everybody’s dead, and the pig too, 110

  When ill-luck sleeps, let no one wake her, 244

  When industry goes out of the door, poverty comes in at the window,
  342

  When it is God’s will to plague a man, a mouse can bite him to death,
  298

  When it pours upon the parson, it drops upon the clerk, 391

  When it rains in August, it rains honey and wine, 244

  When it rains in February, it will be temperate all the year, 244

  When it rains porridge the beggar has no spoon, 391

  When it thunders, the thief becomes honest, 123

  When joy is in the parlour, sorrow is in the passage, 391

  When lazy horses begin to start, old women to dance, and white clouds
  to rain, there is no stopping them, 392

  When many shepherds tend the sheep, they but so much the longer
  sleep, 340

  When mistrust enters, love departs, 379

  When need is greatest, help is nearest, 178

  When neighbours quarrel, lookers-on are more apt to add fuel than
  water, 401

  When nought comes to aught, it does not know itself, 299

  When old horses get warm, they are not easily held in, 177

  When one door shuts, a hundred open, 244

  When one foot stumbles, the other is near falling, 391

  When one goose drinks, all drink, 171

  When one has not what one likes, one must like what one has, 48

  When one is dead, it is for a long while, 48

  When one sheep is over the dam, the rest follow, 298

  When one wolf eats another, there is nothing to eat in the wood, 245

  When (or after) our daughter is married, sons-in-law are plenty, 47,
  195

  When poor, liberal; when rich, penurious, 244

  When poverty (or misfortune) comes in at the door, love flies out at
  the window, 171, 178

  When prosperity smiles, beware of its guiles, 299

  When rogues go in procession the devil carries the cross, 122

  When shepherds quarrel, the wolf has a winning game, 178

  When the ass is too happy he begins dancing on the ice, 297

  When the bee sucks, it makes honey, when the spider, poison, 245

  When the beer (or wine) goes in the wit goes out, 298, 392

  When the blind man carries the banner, woe to those who follow, 47

  When the cage is ready the bird is flown, 47

  When the calf is drowned they cover the well, 332

  When the calf is stolen, the peasant mends the stall, 178

  When the cat sleeps, the mice play, 297

  When the cat’s away, it is jubilee with the mice, 298

  When the cat’s away the mice (or rats) dance, 122

  When the cat’s away the mice will play, 1, 178, 261, 292, 391

  When the child cuts its teeth, death is on the watch, 244

  When the child is christened come godfathers enough, 11

  When the cook and the steward fall out we hear who stole the butter,
  298

  When the cook is roasting for the butler, woe to the master’s
  wine-cask, 391

  When the cord is tightest it is nearest snapping, 392

  When the corsair promises masses and candles, it goes ill with the
  galley, 243

  When the crane attempts to dance with the horse she gets broken
  bones, 393

  When the devil finds the door shut he goes away, 46, 200

  When the devil gets into the church he seats himself on the altar, 331

  When the devil grows old he turns hermit, 47, 102

  When the devil says his pater-nosters (or prayers) he means to cheat
  you, 47, 243

  When the dog is awake the shepherd may sleep, 177

  When the dog is down, every one is ready to bite him, 297

  When the dog is drowning every one brings him water, 47

  When the door is low one must stoop, 47

  When the fields yield not, the saints have not, 244

  When the fool has made up his mind the market is over, 243

  When the fox licks his paw let the farmer look after his geese, 392

  When the fox preaches, look to the geese, 177

  When the fox preaches, take care of yourselves, poultry, 123

  When the fox preaches to the goose her neck is in danger, 392

  When the fox wants to catch geese, he wags his tail, 177

  When the Frenchman sleeps the devil rocks him, 47

  When the game is most thriving it is time to leave off, 392

  When the goose trusts the fox then woe to her neck, 391

  When the guest is in most favour he will do well to quit, 177

  When the head aches all the limbs ache, 391

  When the head is sick the whole body is sick, 299

  When the helm is gone the ship will soon be wrecked, 391

  When the hen has laid an egg she cackles, 152

  When the host smiles most blandly he has an eye to the guest’s purse,
  393

  When the husband earns well the wife spins well, 298

  When the iron is hot, then is the time to strike, 243

  When the jest is at its best, ’twill be well to let it rest, 178

  When the lion is dead the hares jump upon his carcase, 122

  When the lords come out of the council-house, they are wiser than
  when they went in, 178

  When the manger is empty the horses fight, 392

  When the measure is full, it runs over, 179

  When the millers are making an uproar, tie up your sacks; 122

  When the mouse has had enough (or its fill) the meal is bitter, 298,
  392

  When the old dog barks he gives counsel, 219, 288

  When the pear is ripe, it falls, 122, 178

  When the pig has had a bellyful it upsets the trough, 299

  When the prior plays cards, what will the monks do?, 243

  When the rabbit has escaped, comes advice, 216

  When the river makes no noise, it is either dried up or much swollen,
  244

  When the rooks are silent the swans begin to sing, 351

  When the root is worthless, so is the tree, 188

  When the sack is full it pricks up its ears, 178, 298

  When the shepherd strays, the sheep stray, 297

  When the Spaniard sings, he is either mad or has no money, 243

  When the spleen increases, the body diminishes, 243

  When the stomach is full the heart is glad, 297

  When the summer is winter, and the winter summer, it is a sorry year,
  244

  When the sun shines on thee, thou needest not care for the moon, 122

  When the sword is in the mouth you must caress the sheath, 392

  When the tale of bricks is doubled, then comes Moses, 178

  When the tree falls every one runs to cut boughs (or gather sticks),
  342, 393

  When the tree is down every one runs to it with a hatchet to cut
  wood, 88

  When the tree is down everybody runs for branches, 47

  When the waggon is tilting everybody gives it a shove, 393

  When the will is prompt the legs are nimble, 94

  When the wine is in the man, the wit is in the can, 342

  When the wine is in (or goes in) the wit is (or goes) out, 94, 132,
  289, 298, 392

  When the wine runs to waste in the cellar, he mends the cask, 191

  When the wolf grows old the crows ride him, 298

  When the wolf’s ears appear, his body is not far off, 392

  When the word is out it belongs to another (or some one else), 177

  When the words are said, the holy water is made, 47

  When the wound is healed the pain is forgotten, 392

  When there are two friends to one purse, one sings, the other weeps,
  215

  When there is a fire in the neighbourhood carry water to your own
  house, 123

  When there is little bread at table put plenty on your plate, 122

  When there is no wind every man is a pilot, 47

  When there is nothing the church loses, 123

  When there is room in the heart there is room in the house, 378

  When they give you the calf be ready with the halter, 244

  When they offer you a ring, hold out your finger, 244

  When thieves fall out, honest men come to their goods, 342

  When thieves fall out, their knaveries (or thefts) come to light, 35,
  239, 291, 393

  When thine enemy retreateth, make him a golden bridge (For a flying
  enemy make a silver bridge), 299

  When things go well it is easy to advise, 299

  When thou seest thy house in flames, go warm thyself by it, 245

  When thy neighbour’s house is on fire it’s time to look about thee,
  299

  When two dogs fight for a bone, the third runs away with it, 299

  When two enemies blow one horn, the third will have to suffer for it,
  392

  When two quarrel both are in the wrong, 302

  When two Sundays come together, 191

  When we ask a favour we say, Madam; when we obtain it, what we
  please, 244

  When we least expect it, the hare darts out of the ditch, 302

  When we think to catch we are sometimes caught, 195

  When wine enters modesty departs, 94

  When wisdom fails luck helps, 357

  When wise men play the fool (or pranks) they do it with a vengeance,
  108

  When woman reigns, the devil governs, 122

  When you are an anvil, bear; when you are a hammer, strike, 243

  When you are on the road speak not ill of your enemy, 244

  When you are well off, keep as you are, 47

  When you can’t get bread, oat-cakes are not amiss, 198

  When you can’t get meat chickens and bacon are good, 198

  When you eat new bread don’t drink water, 243

  When you go to a strange house knock at the door, 244

  When you go to dance, take heed whom you take by the hand, 376

  When you see the wolf, do not look for his track, 123

  When your devil was born, mine was going to school, 122

  Where a man feels pain he lays his hand, 302

  Where a woman rules the house the devil is serving-man, 188

  Where every one goes, the grass never grows, 189

  Where force prevails, right perishes, 214

  Where friars abound, keep your eyes open, 222

  Where friends, there riches, 189, 289

  Where ghosts walk, there is loving or thieving, 190

  Where God bestows an office, he provides brains to fill it, 177

  Where God builds a church the devil builds a chapel, 188

  Where gold chinks, arguments are of no avail (Where gold avails,
  argument fails), 189

  Where honour grows a span, folly grows an ell, 174

  Where law lacks, honour should eke it out, 357

  Where love is, there the eye is, 94

  Where luck is wanting, diligence is useless, 214

  Where might is master, justice is servant, 189

  Where might is right, right is not might, 189

  Where misfortune befals injuries follow, 5

  Where money and counsel are wanting, it is best not to make war, 379

  Where one door is shut another opens, 215

  Where poverty comes in at the door, love flies out at the window, 297

  Where remedies are needed, sighing avails not, 93

  Where shall the ox go, and not have to plough?, 214, 289

  Where shall the ox go but he must labour, since he knows how?, 266

  Where the bee sucks honey, the spider sucks poison, 342

  Where the best wine grows, the worst is drunk, 188

  Where the bird was hatched, it haunts, 307

  Where the carrion is, there the eagles gather, 378

  Where the cock is the hen does not crow, 289

  Where the devil cannot put his head he puts his tail, 102

  Where the devil can’t go himself, he sends an old woman, 188

  Where the dike (or dam) is lowest, the water first runs over, 342

  Where the goat is tied she must browse, 44

  Where the goat leaps, leaps that which sucks her, 241

  Where the hedge is lowest, every one goes over, 94, 188, 342

  Where the hedge is lowest men leap over, 44

  Where the hedge is lowest, the devil leaps over, 188

  Where the hostess is handsome the wine is good, 44

  Where the lion’s skin falls short, borrow of the fox, 188

  Where the lion’s skin falls short, piece it out with (or join) that
  of the fox, 93, 94

  Where the Pope is, Rome is, 94

  Where the river is deepest it makes least noise, 94, 215, 289

  Where the sea goes let the sands go, 241

  Where the ship goes the brig can go, 94

  Where the thread is weakest it breaks, 44

  Where the wasp has passed the fly sticks fast, 44

  Where the wolf gets one lamb he looks for another, 94, 218, 289

  Where there are no dogs the fox is a king, 94

  Where there are too many cooks the soup will be too salt (Too many
  cooks spoil the broth), 94

  Where there are too many workmen there is little work, 189

  Where there is discipline there is virtue; where there is peace there
  is plenty, 378

  Where there is great love there is great pain, 94

  Where there is least heart there is most tongue, 94

  Where there is little bread, cut first, 267

  Where there is no honour there is no dishonour, 289

  Where there is no sore there needs no plaister, 44

  Where there is no want of will there will be no want of opportunity,
  235

  Where there is no wit within, no wit will come out, 357

  Where there is not equality there never can be perfect love, 94

  Where there is nothing, the king (or emperor) loses his rights, 44,
  189, 342

  Where there is shame, there is virtue, 189

  Where there’s a will there’s a way, 67, 214

  Where there’s fire there’s smoke, 214

  Where there’s money, there is the devil; but where there’s none, a
  greater evil, 189

  Where there’s no fire there’s no smoke, 276, 289

  Where there’s no good within, no good comes out, 302

  Where there’s no jealousy, there’s no love, 189

  Where there’s no love, all faults are seen, 189

  Where there’s no might there’s no right, 289

  Where there’s no shame, there’s no honour, 189, 308

  Where they eat your meat let them pick the bones, 215

  Where two fall out the third wins, 189

  Where water has been, water will come again, 189

  Where will is right, law is banished, 379

  Where wine goes in, modesty goes out, 94, 189

  Where you cannot climb over you must creep under, 379

  Where you lost your cloak, seek it, 215

  Where you smart there I will hit you, 204

  Where you tell your secret you surrender your freedom, 267

  Where you think there is bacon there are not even hooks for it, 194

  Where you were a page be not an esquire, 276

  Where your father has been with ink, go not you with a bag (_i.e._
  what your father has sold and assigned, think not to recover with a
  bag of papers. In other words, don’t go to law for it), 215

  Where’er an ass is crowned to fame, both town and country bear the
  shame, 189

  Wherever there is a pretty spot, the devil plants a monastery or a
  lord, 189

  Wherever there is mischief, there is sure to be a priest and a woman
  in it, 189

  Wherever you are, do as you see done (When you are at Rome, do as
  Rome does), 214, 241

  Whether it be so or not, husband, put on your hood (He had told her
  there was a new law that every man with horns should wear a hood), 241

  Whether the pitcher strike the stone, or the stone the pitcher, woe
  to the pitcher, 256

  While the dogs yelp the hare flies to the wood, 390

  While the grass is growing the steed starves, 174, 317, 390

  While the great bells are ringing no one hears the little ones, 391

  While the pot boils friendship blooms, 169

  While there’s life there’s hope, 99, 276

  Whilst the dogs are growling at each other the wolf devours the
  sheep, 45

  Whilst the grass grows the steed starves, 110, 154

  Whilst the nurse suckles we love her; when she is of no further use
  she is forgotten, 222

  Whilst the tall maid is stooping the little one sweeps the house,
  232, 276

  White hands are no offence, 228

  White meal is not got out of a coal-sack, 16

  Whither goest thou, misfortune? To where there is more, 194, 276

  Whither goest thou, sorrow? Whither I am used to go, 194

  Whither shall the ox go where he will not have to plough?, 194, 214,
  289

  Who accepts nothing has nothing to return, 184

  Who accepts, sells himself, 85

  Who answers for another, pays, 52

  Who are ready to believe are easy to deceive, 183

  Who arrays himself in other men’s garments is stripped on the
  highway, 247

  Who avoids small sins does not fall into great ones, 183

  Who begins amiss ends amiss, 187

  Who blackens others does not whiten himself, 179

  Who blows his nose too hard makes it bleed, 50

  Who bows to might loses his right, 186

  Who builds on the mob builds on sand, 81

  Who buys land buys war, 79

  Who buys wants a hundred eyes, who sells need have but one, 311

  Who can escape envy and blame that speaks or writes for public fame?,
  343

  Who cannot beat the horse let him beat the saddle, 84

  Who cannot fight wins nought by right, 184

  Who cannot sing may whistle, 184

  Who cannot work out his salvation by heart will not do it by book, 50

  Who carries doubtful people to his house will doubtless from his
  carriage something lose, 187

  Who changes country, changes luck, 83

  Who changes his condition changes fortune, 83

  Who chastises his child will be honoured by him, who chastises him
  not will be shamed, 344

  Who comes first grinds first, 186, 309

  Who comes seldom is welcome, 85

  Who comes unbidden departs unthanked, 186

  Who could live without hope?, 52

  Who dangles after the great is the last at table and the first to be
  cuffed, 85

  Who deceives me once, shame on him; if he deceive me twice, shame on
  me, 183

  Who demands justice must administer justice, 184

  Who divides honey with the bear will be like to get the lesser share,
  79

  Who does all he may never does well, 81

  Who does not punish evil, invites it, 187

  Who does not venture gets neither horse nor mule, and who ventures
  too much loses horse and mule, 51

  Who does not wish to be like the wolf let him not wear its skin, 84

  Who does too much often does little, 127

  Who don’t keep faith with God won’t keep it with man, 308

  Who doubts, errs not, 49

  Who eats capon, capon comes to him, 48

  Who eats his fowl alone, must saddle his horse alone, 252, 292

  Who errs in the tens errs in the thousands, 80

  Who excuses himself accuses himself, 53, 86, 310

  Who excuses himself without being accused proclaims his fault, 86

  Who faints not, achieves, 265

  Who falls short in the head, must be long in the heels, 175

  Who fears no shame comes to no honour, 308 (_See_ Where there’s no
  shame)

  Who frequents the kitchen smells of smoke, 81

  Who gives, teaches a return, 79

  Who gives to me, teaches me to give, 310

  Who gives well, sells dear, if the receiver be not a churl, 78

  Who gives what he has, before he is dead, take a mallet and knock
  that fool on the head, 247

  Who glows not, burns not, 83

  Who goes and returns makes a good journey, 54

  Who goes fasting to bed will sleep but lightly, 344

  Who goes himself is in earnest, who sends is indifferent, 87

  Who goes not, sees not; who proves not, believes not, 84

  Who goes softly goes safely, and he that goes safely goes far, 86

  Who has a bad wife, his hell begins on earth, 309

  Who has a head won’t want for a hat, 181

  Who has a tongue in his head can go all the world over (or to Rome),
  81

  Who has but one eye must take good care of it, 310

  Who has, is, 81

  Who has, let him thereof take heed; love wanes, misfortune comes with
  speed, 182

  Who has love in his heart has spurs in his sides, 81

  Who has many servants has many thieves, 311

  Who has never done thinking never begins doing, 83

  Who has no bread to spare should not keep a dog, 201

  Who has no children does not know what love is, 83

  Who has no head should have legs, 83

  Who has no money in his purse must have honey in his mouth, 83

  Who has no money must have no wishes, 83

  Who has no plagues makes himself some, 83

  Who has no shame all the world is his own, 82, 84

  Who has no thirst has no business at the fountain, 343

  Who has not, cannot, 50

  Who has not, is not, 83

  Who has nothing, fears nothing, 83, 201

  Who has nothing, is nothing, 83

  Who has patience may get fat thrushes at a farthing apiece, 82

  Who has patience sees his revenge, 82

  Who has plenty of pepper may pepper his beans, 344

  Who has something, is something, 82

  Who has tasted a sour apple, will have the more relish for a sweet
  one, 183

  Who has time, yet waits for time, comes to a time of repentance, 253

  Who hath no courage must have legs, 83

  Who hears but one bell hears but one sound, 50

  Who heeds not little things, will be troubled about lesser ones, 182

  Who herds with wolves, must howl with wolves, 183 (_See_ He who herds)

  Who holds his peace and gathers stones, will find a time to throw
  them, 292

  Who honours not age, is unworthy of it, 186

  Who hunts two hares together catches neither, 186 (_See_ He who hunts)

  Who is always prying into other men’s affairs, leads a dangerous
  life, 249

  Who is born a fool is never cured, 83

  Who is born of a cat will run after mice, 50

  Who is in fear of every leaf must not go into the wood, 82, 311

  Who is in the right fears, who is in the wrong hopes, 82, 311

  Who is over nice, loses many a shoe, 181

  Who is righteous overmuch is a morsel for the Old One, 310

  Who is tender in everything is a fool in everything (Catalan), 245

  Who is to bell the cat?, 249

  Who is to carry the cat to the water?, 249

  Who is well seated should not budge, 186

  Who is your enemy? A man of your own trade, 249

  Who judges others, condemns himself, 78

  Who knows most, believes least, 85

  Who knows most, forgives most, 85

  Who knows most, says least, 51, 85, 250

  Who knows not how to dissemble knows not how to reign, 84

  Who knows not how to flatter knows not how to talk, 84

  Who knows not how to pray let him go sail the sea, 84

  Who _knows_ nothing in his thirtieth year, _is_ nothing in his
  fortieth, _has_ nothing in his fiftieth, _learns_ nothing, _is_
  nothing, and _comes to_ nothing, 182

  Who knows the tongues is at home everywhere, 308

  Who laughs at others’ ills, has his own behind the door, 85

  Who lends his lips to nought but blame, has in his heart no love of
  fame, 184

  Who lends recovers not; or if he recovers, recovers not all; or if
  all, not much; or if much, a mortal enemy, 251

  Who lends to a friend loses doubly, 52

  Who lets another sit on his shoulder, will soon have him on his head,
  185 (_See_ He who lets)

  Who lies down with dogs gets up with fleas, 79 (_See_ He that lies)

  Who lives on the score has shame evermore, 54

  Who lives will see, 54

  Who loves, believes, 78

  Who loves, fears, 78

  Who loves his work and knows to spare, may live and flourish
  anywhere, 179

  Who loves not women, wine, and song, remains a fool his whole life
  long, 184

  Who loves the tree loves the branch, 78

  Who loves well chastises well, 28, 48, 78

  Who loves well is slow to forget, 48

  Who makes friends of all, keeps none, 179

  Who makes no promises has none to perform, 184

  Who makes the wolf his companion should carry a dog under his cloak,
  81

  Who moves picks up, who stands still dries up, 86

  Who neither believes heaven or hell, the devil heartily wishes him
  well, 189

  Who offends writes on sand; who is offended, on marble, 84

  Who often changes, suffers, 53

  Who paints me before, blackens me behind, 79

  Who pays a debt creates capital, 85

  Who pays beforehand is served behindhand, 85

  Who pays promptly borrows when he will, 51

  Who proves too much, proves nothing, 52

  Who punishes one threatens a hundred, 53

  Who readily borrows, readily lies (Debtors are liars), 182

  Who receives, should thank; who gives, should be silent, 181

  Who reckons without his host must reckon again, 311 (_See_ He that
  reckons)

  Who refuses, muses, 52

  Who refuses to submit to justice, must not complain of oppression, 184

  Who rides slow must saddle betimes, 183

  Who runs is followed, 343

  Who saves, saves for the cat, 85

  Who says little, has little to answer for, 186

  Who serves the mass is thanked by none, but cursed if aught be left
  undone, 53

  Who serves the public, serves no one (or a fickle master), 85, 308
  (_See_ He who serves)

  Who serves well and says nothing makes claim enough, 73

  Who serves well asks enough, 5

  Who sings, drives away care, 247

  Who sows ill, reaps ill, 82

  Who sows, reaps, 53

  Who sows thorns should not go barefoot, 53, 85

  Who speaks, sows; who listens, reaps, 51

  Who spits against heaven, it falls on his head, 49

  Who spits against the wind, fouls his beard, 344 (_See_ He who spits)

  Who steals a calf, steals a cow, 181

  Who takes a lion at a distance fears a mole present, 85

  Who takes an eel by the tail and a woman at her word, may say he
  holds nothing, 85

  Who takes an eel by the tail or a woman by her word, grasp as he
  will, holds nothing fast, 181

  Who talks much, errs much, 250

  Who the daughter would win, with mamma must begin, 161

  Who threatens, warns, 181

  Who throws a stone above himself may have it fall on his own head
  (Eccles. xxvii. 25), 181

  Who throws a stone at the sky, may have it fall on his head, 79

  Who to-day was a haughty knight, is to-morrow a penniless wight, 309

  Who troubles others has no rest himself, 78

  Who undertakes many things at once seldom does anything well, 311

  Who undertakes too much seldom succeeds, 310

  Who ventures nothing has no luck (Nothing venture, nothing have), 251

  Who ventures to lend, loses money and friend, 310

  Who wants fire, let him look for it in the ashes, 311

  Who wants to beat a dog, soon finds a stick, 87, 308 (_See_ He that
  wants)

  Who watches not, catches not, 310

  Who weds a sot to get his cot, will lose the cot and keep the sot, 312

  Who will not feed the cats, must feed the mice and rats, 184

  Who will not when he can, can’t when he will, 292 (_See_ He that will
  not)

  Who wishes for a short Lent let him contract debts to be paid at
  Easter, 88

  Who wives for a dower, resigns his own power, 52

  Who would be rich, must keep his soul under cover of his cash-box, 185

  Who would be young in age, must in youth be sage, 182

  Who would have many friends let him test but few, 87

  Who would not have feet set on his neck, let him not stoop, 84

  Who would regard all things complacently must wink at a great many,
  344

  Who would win, must learn to bear, 182

  Who would wish to be valued must make himself scarce, 186

  Whoever brings finds the door open for him, 72

  Whoever falls sick of folly, is long in getting cured, 248

  Whom fortune favours, the world favours, 177

  Whom God loves, his bitch litters pigs, 201

  Whore or thief, young or old, welcome so you’ve got the gold, 168

  Whoredom and thieving are never long concealed, 242

  Whose bread I eat, his song I sing, 187

  Whoso hath land hath war, 53

  Whoso hunteth with cats will catch nothing but rats, 309

  Whoso is tired of happy days, let him take a wife, 309

  Whoso is well let him keep so, 49

  Who’s the man that was never fooled by a woman?, 153

  Will he nill he, the ass must go to the fair, 293

  Will is power, 64

  Willows are weak, yet serve to bind bigger wood, 105

  Win a bet (or game) of your friend, and drink it on the spot, 203, 268

  Wind and fortune are not lasting, 261, 295

  Windmills are not driven by bellows, 188

  Wine and women make fools of everybody, 176

  Wine poured out is not wine swallowed, 64

  Wine upon beer is very good cheer, beer upon wine consider with fear,
  176

  Wine wears no breeches, 36, 220

  Wine will not keep in a foul vessel, 17

  Wipe the nose of your neighbour’s son, and marry him to your
  daughter, 196, 288

  Wipe your sore eye with your elbow, 219, 288

  Wisdom in the man, patience in the wife, brings peace to the house,
  and a happy life, 344

  Wisdom is the least burdensome travelling pack, 381

  Wise lads and old fools were never good for anything, 124

  Wise men sue for offices, and blockheads get them, 341

  Wishes never filled the bag, 41

  With a little wrong a man comes by his right, 209

  With a staircase before you, you look for a rope to go down by, 193

  “With all my heart!” (or great pleasure), says the boor when he must,
  161, 173

  With an old husband’s hide one buys a young one, 16

  With art and knavery we live through half the year; with knavery and
  art we live through the other half, 88

  With great men one must allow five to be an even number, 135

  With honour in store, what would you more, 343

  With houses and gold, men are rarely bold, 189

  With law must the land be built, 390

  With lightning and with love, the clothes sound, the heart burned, 220

  With money you would not know yourself, without money nobody would
  know you, 209

  With patience and time the mulberry-leaf becomes a silk gown, 162

  With the fox one must play the fox, 89

  With the good we become good, 301

  With the Gospel men may become heretics, 88

  With the help of an If, you might put Paris into a bottle, 7

  With the hide of the dog its bite is cured, 89

  With time and straw medlars ripen, 7, 88

  With wishing comes grieving, 89

  Without bread and wine, even love will pine, 55

  Without debt, without care, 126

  Without knowledge, without sin, 165

  Witticisms spare no one, 9

  Woe be to an evil eye, 403

  Wolves are often hidden under sheep’s clothing, 393

  Wolves do not eat wolves (or one another), 35, 104, 109

  Woman impromptu, man on reflection, 105

  Woman’s beauty, the forest echo, and rainbows, soon pass away, 176

  Women always speak the truth, but not the whole truth, 108

  Women and glass are always in danger, 265

  Women and hens are lost by too much gadding, 98

  Women and maidens must be praised, whether truly or falsely, 148

  Women are as fickle as April weather, 176

  Women are never at a loss for words, 176

  Women are supernumerary when present, and missed when absent, 267

  Women are watches that keep bad time, 176

  Women are wise impromptu, fools on reflection, 125

  Women, asses, and nuts, require strong hands, 93

  Women, fortune, and gold, favour fools, 176

  Women know a point more than the devil, 108

  Women, money, and wine, have their balm and their harm, 18

  Women, priests, and poultry, never have enough, 93

  Women rouge that they may not blush, 108

  Women, wind, and fortune, soon change, 233, 283

  Women’s tears are a fountain of craft, 106

  Woo the widow whilst she is in weeds, 148

  Woods have ears and fields have eyes, 174, 304

  Word by word great books are made, 39

  Words are female, deeds are male, 108

  Words are good, but fowls lay eggs, 190

  Words are good when works follow, 190

  Words don’t fill the belly, 291

  Words don’t fill the sack, 190

  Words fine and bold are goods half sold, 168

  Words of snow, which fell last year, 190

  Words often do more than blows, 190

  Words once spoken cannot be wiped out with a sponge, 363

  Words will not do for my aunt, for she does not put faith even in
  deeds, 237

  Words won’t feed cats, 108

  Work done expects money, 287

  Workmen are easier found than masters (There are more hands than
  heads), 187

  Worldly good is ebb and flood, 343

  Would you be strong, conquer yourself, 188

  Would you have me serve you, good king, give me the means of living,
  293

  Would you know your daughter? See her in company, 293

  Would you live long, be healthy and fat, drink like a dog, and eat
  like a cat, 188

  Wounds from the knife are healed, but not those of the tongue, 255

  Wounds heal, but not ill words, 256

  Wounds pain most when grown cool, 254

  Write on one of the devil’s horns, “Good angel,” and many will
  believe it, 168


  Y.

  Years and sins are always more than owned, 72

  Yesterday a cowherd, to-day a cavalier, 204

  Yielding stays war, 163

  You a lady, I a lady, who is to put the sow out of doors? (Galician),
  262

  You can have no more of a fox than his skin, 386

  You cannot damage a wrecked ship, 114

  You cannot draw blood from a turnip, 114

  You cannot drink and whistle at the same time, 388 (_See_ No one can
  blow)

  You cannot get oil out of a wall, 43

  You cannot have peace longer than your neighbour chooses, 387 (_See_
  No man can have)

  You cannot make a good archbishop of a rogue, 387

  You cannot make a good hunting-horn (or shaft) of a pig’s tail, 275,
  387

  You cannot make a hawk of a buzzard, 43

  You cannot make a sieve of an ass’s tail, 135

  You cannot make an ass drink if he is not thirsty, 43

  You cannot pull hard with a broken rope, 387

  You cannot sail as you would, but as the wind blows, 387

  You cannot shear the sheep closer than the skin, 388

  You cannot take a cow from a man who has none, 386

  You can’t make pancakes without breaking eggs, 237

  You have broken my head, and now you bring me plaister, 245

  You have debts, and make debts still; if you’ve not lied, lie you
  will, 213

  You have lent and not recovered; and if recovered, not so much; and
  if so much, not such; and if such, a mortal enemy, 276 (_See_ Who
  lends recovers not)

  You have married a beauty? So much the worse for you, 109

  You may always find an opportunity in your sleeve, if you choose, 387

  You may as well give a good beating as a bad one, 7

  You may call that your own which no one can take from you, 358

  You may cook in small pots as well as in large ones, 388

  You may force a horse (or an ox) to the water, but you cannot make
  him drink, 388, 388

  You may force a man to shut his eyes, but you cannot make him sleep,
  388

  You may gain by fair words what may fail you by angry ones, 386

  You may get something off a bone, but nothing off a stone, 387

  You may keep yourself safe from fire, but not from a bad man, 276

  You may knock a long while against an alder-bush before you get a
  swarm of bees out of it, 389

  You may know the lion by his claw, 3

  You may light another’s candle at your own without loss, 388

  You may often feel that heavily on your back, which you took lightly
  on your conscience, 400

  You may preach ever so long to the wolf, he will nevertheless call
  for lamb before night, 390

  You may shut your doors against a thief, but not against a liar, 388

  You must be strong to pull a rope against a stronger, 357

  You must contrive to bake with the flour you have, 386

  You must grease the wheels if you would have the car run, 75

  You must have good luck to catch hares with a drum, 357 (_See_ Hares)

  You must howl with the wolves when you are among them, 390 (_See_ He
  who herds)

  You must judge a maiden at the kneading trough, and not in a dance,
  390

  You must not throw stones into your neighbour’s garden, 23

  You must shift your sail with the wind, 75

  You must walk a long while behind a wild goose before you find an
  ostrich feather, 389

  You need not find a shelter for an old ox, 263

  You notice what I drink, and not the thirst I feel, 233

  You surrender your freedom where you deposit your secret, 201

  You used to be a baker, though now you wear gloves, 239

  You want better bread than wheaten, 206

  You will not be loved if you think of none but yourself, 70, 237

  You will not see many with green eyes, 288

  Young cats will mouse, young apes will louse, 330

  Young dogs have sharp teeth, 402

  Young folk, silly folk; old folk, cold folk, 330

  Young fools think that the old are dotards, but the old have
  forgotten more than the young fools know, 305

  Young gambler, old beggar, 150, 156

  Young people must be taught, old ones be honoured, 363

  Young pigs grunt as old hogs grunted before them, 396

  Young twigs may be bent, but not old trees, 330

  Your cracked jug seems better to me than my sound one, 232

  Your enemy makes you wise, 103

  Your friend lends, and your enemy asks payment, 332

  Your wife and the sauce at the lance hand (the right hand), 227

  “Your words are fair,” said the wolf, “but I will not come into the
  village”, 141

  Youth may stray afar yet return at last, 29


                               THE END.


                  C. WHITING, BEAUFORT HOUSE, STRAND.





End of Project Gutenberg's A Polyglot of Foreign Proverbs, by Henry Bohn

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A POLYGLOT OF FOREIGN PROVERBS ***

***** This file should be named 51090-0.txt or 51090-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/1/0/9/51090/

Produced by Giovanni Fini,  Chris Curnow, Lindy Walsh and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

